# auditory-mismatch-negativity-under-predictive-codi

Auditory Mismatch Negativity Under
Predictive Coding Framework and Its
Role in Psychotic Disorders
Chun Yuen Fong 1, Wai Him Crystal Law 1, Takanori Uka 2 and Shinsuke Koike 1,3,4,5*
1 Center for Evolutionary Cognitive Sciences, Graduate School of Art and Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Japan,
2 Department of Integrative Physiology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi, Japan,
3 University of Tokyo Institute for Diversity & Adaptation of Human Mind (UTIDAHM), Meguro-ku, Japan, 4 University of Tokyo
Center for Integrative Science of Human Behavior (CiSHuB), 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Japan, 5 The International Research
Center for Neurointelligence (WPI-IRCN), Institutes for Advanced Study (UTIAS), University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Japan
Traditional neuroscience sees sensory perception as a simple feedforward process. This
view is challenged by the predictive coding model in recent years due to the robust
evidence researchers had found on how our prediction could in ﬂuence perception. In the
ﬁrst half of this article, we reviewed the concept of predictive brain and some empirical
evidence of sensory prediction in visual and auditory processing. The predictive function
along the auditory pathway was mainly studied by mismatch negativity (MMN) —a brain
response to an unexpected disruption of regularity. We summarized a range of MMN
paradigms and discussed how they could contribute to the theoretical development of the
predictive coding neural network by the mechanism of adaptation and deviance detection.
Such methodological and conceptual evo lution sharpen MMN as a tool to better
understand the structural and functional brain abnormality for neuropsychiatric disorder
such as schizophrenia.
Keywords: prediction, MMN, mismatch negativity, schizophrenia, predictive coding
INTRODUCTION
From an evolutionary perspective, the nervous system of animals needs to be highly adaptive to the
constant changes of the physical world to increase their survivability. To achieve this, an accurately
perceived sensory input and the respective cognitive processing, as well as an effective interaction
between them are needed. The animal brain, therefore, forms a dynamic network linking its own
body and the external environment ( 1). This perspective becomes fundamental to many
contemporary brain-behavioral models. Perceptual learning, for instance, highlights how our
sensory system is shaped and tuned by past experiences. Such exceptional ability allows animals
to ﬁlter off unwanted sensation (noise) and concentrate on the unexpected information, based on
their prior knowledge. This function is termed as prediction in predictive coding theory of the brain,
serving as one of its foundational concepts ( 2–4).
Predictive coding has gained increasing interest in recent decades and appears as a robust
underlying mechanism of perceptual learning ( 3, 5). The notion of predictive coding suggested that
the brain continuously generates and updates its predictions to the physical world by integrating the
sensory information. In this manner, perception is not a uni-directional projection, but a bi-
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579321
Edited by:
Gregory Light,
University of California, San Diego,
United States
Reviewed by:
Gianluca Sera ﬁni,
San Martino Hospital (IRCCS), Italy
Kairi Kreegipuu,
University of Tartu, Estonia
*Correspondence:
Shinsuke Koike
skoike-tky@umin.ac.jp
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neuroimaging and Stimulation,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychiatry
Received: 30 April 2020
Accepted: 18 August 2020
Published: 10 September 2020
Citation:
Fong CY, Law WHC, Uka T and
Koike S (2020) Auditory Mismatch
Negativity Under Predictive
Coding Framework and Its
Role in Psychotic Disorders.
Front. Psychiatry 11:557932.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.557932
REVIEW
published: 10 September 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.557932
directional and hierarchical process (see Figure 1 ). In sensory
processing, sensory “prediction” is actively generated by an
internal model at the higher-order area which incorporates
information from the past (memory), produces and sends
information regarding the fut ure to the lower hierarchical
cascade. This inferential p rocess naturally allows the
implementation of the Bayesian theories, where prior sensory
experiences and current sensory input were used to compute the
posterior perceptual estimation, that is, the prediction ( 6–8). At
each processing layer, neurons subtract this prediction from the
sensory data and register the residual by a “prediction error ”
signal. In this sense, it is not necessary for an expected event to
transmit to the top of the cortical hierarchy ( 9). Instead, only the
information that deviates from predictions is further processed
and passed upward to the higher-order cortical area in the form
of “error”. The greater the prediction error, the larger the neural
response evoked. This prediction error signal propagates through
an ascending pathway and updates the subsequent prediction.
When the prediction eventually matched with the sensory
input, the neural activity induced by prediction error would
be suppressed.
While it may seem easy to assume that one is consciously
aware of the role of prediction in everyday decision making ( 10),
it is neither fair nor true. There are many “less obvious ”
predictions hidden along the sensory system in one ’s daily life
that are likely to go unnoticed. For example, a goal-directed
behavior as simple as grabbing an object ﬁrst requires the
integration of predictions of the visual and interoceptive inputs
to ensure the precision of the sensory information, such as the
locations of the object and our hand [see ( 11)]. With these
accurate sensory inputs, the brain can produce the
corresponding muscle movements via the corticomuscular
channel as an end-result. Some literature showed that this
succession of neuronal activities can be modulated by the
dopaminergic reward system ( 12, 13).
With such a fascinating theory on sensory perception,
scientists put effort into “visualizing” or quantifying prediction
and prediction error in order to justify their proposed neural
mechanism. This is later achieved by experiments that initiate
prediction by the repeated presentation of certain stimuli at a
given rhythmic time interval and subsequently stop delivering
the predicted stimulus. This paradigm generates a transient
neural response in the absence of sensory input, which
becomes strong evidence of sensory prediction. For example,
by repetitively presenting auditory or visual cues followed by a
button press (motor response), the enhanced event-related
potential (ERP) could be evo ked by the button press even
without the actual feedback stimuli ( 14–16). Using a similar
technique of attributing sensory feedback with another sensory
cue, pre-activation of the sensory cortex was also observed via
functional imaging which is in support of the subjective
prediction in sensory input ( 17).
The notion of predictive coding has been adopted and
conﬁrmed by a wide range of neurocognitive computational
models ( 2, 7, 18–21). Its extensive application also provides
valuable insights into the investigation of many psychiatric and
developmental disorders such as schizophrenia and autism ( 22–
24
). For instance, abnormalities (hyper/hypo-responsivity) in
sensory processing were hypothesized to be responsible for
several symptoms of psychiatric disorders ( 25). Disruption of
the exteroceptive prediction may lead to visual and auditory
hallucinations while the disturbances of interoception might also
FIGURE 1 | A simpliﬁed sensory prediction model. The blue arrow indicates how prediction is updated on the prediction neurons and pass to a lower hierarchical
level. The red arrow indicates how prediction error is generated and feedforward to a higher hierarchical level. Each hierarchical level could repre sent a processing
layer, for example, in auditory processing, i.e., auditory cortex, thalamus (medial geniculate body), and midbrain (inferior colliculus), respec tively (from top to bottom).
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579322
give rise to emotional disorders ( 20, 26, 27). In this paper, we
seek to review the neural basis and empirical ﬁndings of sensory
prediction under the predictive coding framework. The majority
of experimental and clinical evidence for sensory prediction was
provided by the mismatch negativity (MMN) paradigm in which
the prediction error ﬂuctuation underlies the breaking of a
stream of acoustic sounds. Therefore, we seek to give an
extensive review to such task and discuss its application in
neuropsychiatric disorders using the example of schizophrenia.
SENSORY PREDICTION IN THE
VISUAL SYSTEM
If we look around the living room where we are staying in, we
would not be surprised to see objects such as chairs, desks, lamps,
or windows. However, the presence of a wild animal or a stranger
in the room would undoubtedly shock and alert us. Predictive
coding theory suggested that the higher cortical area would
constantly produce internal models of the surroundings and
make expectations on what objects we would see. This
information would be passed to the lower order neural
structure, forming predictions on visual features as simple as
colors and shapes ( 28). In this example, assuming that we live
alone, the prediction error is generated at the hierarchical level
where we identify the objects we see as human or animal (which
are objects that we do not expect to see in our living room). On
the other hand, if we live with our family and pets rather than
alone, the upward propagated prediction error might appear
later at a higher level when our brain successfully identi ﬁes those
objects as “intruders”. This suggested visual perception is not
only driven by the bottom-up sensory input but also in ﬂuenced
by the top-down prediction model ( 29).
The predictive ability in the visual system can be observed as
early as in the retina. Previous studies showed that retinal
ganglion cell had enhanced sensitivity to unpredicted changes
and suppression for predicted stimulations in various domains of
visual stimuli including orient ation, spatial frequency, and
temporal structure ( 30). This property of receptive ﬁelds is
consistent with the notion of predictive coding. At the lower
hierarchical level, prediction of the visual system can also be seen
from salience detection, which is guided by a “centred-surround
prediction” mechanism ( 3, 31). In a simple visual search task, a
salient visual feature (e.g., color, motion, and orientation) can be
spotted irrespective to the number of surrounded visual
distractors ( 32). Since a pixel in the natural scene tends to
correlate with the neighboring pixels, the brain is able to form
a spatial prediction on the centred pixel by the weighted linear
sum of the surroundings ( 3). A salient stimulus is inconsistent
with the internal computational model, which produces an error
detection signal that increases along the visual hierarchy via
retina (33, 34), lateral geniculate nucleus [LGN; ( 35)], striate and
extrastriate cortex ( 3), and lateral intra-parietal cortex ( 36). This
signal passes along the visual hierarchy, reaches the oculomotor
system, and re-orients the eye-gaze to the location with high
salience ( 37). Such hierarchical communications are well-
supported by the feedforward and feedback connections in the
cortico-cortical and subcortical-cortical network which have
been described in detail in previous literatures ( 38–40).
The predictive power of the visual system also compensates
the limited capabilities per se. For example, human retina can
only encode two-dimensional information. In addition to the
retinal disparity produced by our two visual ﬁelds, visual
experiences such as an object ’s relative size and aerial
perspective also contribute to our 3-D vision by providing the
perception of depth. Besides, the number of neurons and energy
required for metabolic activities restrict the computational power
(e.g., sampling rate and speed of signal transmission) of the
visual system. Visual prediction, therefore, becomes crucial in
motion perception. By sampling an object ’s movement within
hundred milliseconds, the visual system is capable to predict the
motion pathway of the object which provides the visual ability to
pursue an object moving in constant velocity ( 41–43).
A more active form of visual prediction happens when we
voluntarily focus on a location in space and enhance our visual
sensitivities on that speci ﬁc location. This ability to guide our
spatial attention is based on one ’
s prediction on where a task-
relevant cue might be presented. Eye movement signals in frontal
eye ﬁeld (FEF) can also enhance the sensory gain in the visual
cortex [for example, area V4; ( 44, 45)]. Previous studies have
shown that neuronal activity can be modulated by the prediction
of stimulus onset ( 46, 47). By conditioning a visual target on a
certain location with a sensory cue after a period of time, a
monkey could learn the conditioned patterns of the visual events
by making eye movements to the target with a precise temporal
pattern (47). An increased neuronal response could be observed
from their parietal cortex when the visual target was absent from
the conditioned location unexpectedly. This paradigm is similar
to the terminology of the oddball experiment where a “deviant”
event elicits an elevated neural response, which is also known as
MMN, compared to the “standard” (48). This visual MMN signal
can be suppressed by silencing the somatostatin-containing
GABAergic interneurons (SOMs) pharmacogenetically ( 49).
Overall, the empirical evidence of the visual system appears to
support the notion of predict ive coding. In the following
sections, the sensory prediction in the auditory system would
be described in more detail.
SENSORY PREDICTION IN THE
AUDITORY SYSTEM AND MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY
Similar to the visual counterpart, the auditory prediction is vital
to cognitive functions, including language, and speech processing
(50). In spoken word recognition, it has been demonstrated that
there are top-down predictions in the lexical-semantic system.
For example, studies showed that replacing the last syllable of a
word such as “formula” to “formubo” can facilitate an enhanced
evoked response at superior temporal gyrus (STG) on the
listeners ( 51). Another experiment showed that a non-Finnish
language vowel presented in a train of Finnish vowels could elicit
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579323
a pre-attentive neural response at the left auditory cortex (AC)
(52). Predictive coding hypothesized that these neural responses
originated from the prediction error signal when the expected
vowels unmatched with the actual acoustic signal somewhere in a
higher cortical area of the linguistic hierarchy. Music perception
was also hypothesized to be inferred by our experience and
knowledge on music (e.g., melodic, temporal, and harmonic
structure) while we are listening to a stream of musical
tones ( 53).
The neural basis of prediction and prediction error, as well as
the evidence of the predictive coding hierarchy in the auditory
domain, was explored most extensively by the studies of auditory
MMN. The MMN is a negative de ﬂection of the ERP elicited by
an abrupt change of auditory stimulus after the repetition of the
same sound, indexing the pre-attentive sensory processing ( 54).
MMN is not a manifestation unique to the auditory modality. It
can also be elicited by visual stimuli using a similar experimental
setup [for more detail, please see the reviews of vMMN from ( 55)
and (56)]. MMN reduction is one of the most robust biomarkers
in patients with schizophrenia ( 57). Therefore, the neural
mechanism underlying MMN has raised signi ﬁcant interest
over the years.
The MMN in a classical oddball paradigm was measured by
electroencephalogram (EEG) when an infrequent deviant (d)
sound was interspersed among a train of repetitive standard (s)
sounds (e.g., ssssssdsssssdsss …)( 58). The deviant tone
can be different from the standard in terms of frequency,
duration, or intensity. Traditionally, the MMN is obtained by
subtracting the event-related response evoked by the standard
tone from the response of deviant tone. MMN experiment can be
carried out in the absence of attention, though some studies
showed that the MMN response is attenuated without the
involvement of attention ( 59).
NEURAL BASIS OF MISMATCH
NEGATIVITY UNDER THE PREDICTIVE
CODING FRAMEWORK
The auditory MMN often peaked at the frontocentral scalp that
inverts polarity at the posterior-temporal regions ( 60). Dipole
analyses on EEG and magnetoencephalogram patterns revealed
that the neural generator of this response was located at the AC
which lies along the STG in each hemisphere ( 61, 62). Whether
the deviant was presented as a mismatch in frequency, duration
or intensity shifted the dipole source over the supratemporal
cortex ( 63–66). Other regions have also been reported to
contribute to MMN in an auditory oddball paradigm, for
example, frontal cortex [FC; ( 67–71)], subcortical structures
such as thalamus ( 21, 72, 73) and hippocampus ( 74, 75).
Despite decades of clinical and experimental research, the role
of different neural structures and the actual neural mechanism
underlying MMN remained controversial. Two main hypotheses
have been most extensively studied, namely, “adaptation” and
“sensory memory/predictive coding ” (76).
Adaptation, also known as stimulus-speci ﬁc adaptation
(SSA), was interpreted as a lower-level inhibitory neural
mechanism in response to repetitive stimulations ( 77). This
property was observed at cortical and subcortical structures
such as the AC, thalamus (medial geniculate body, MGB), and
midbrain (inferior colliculus, IC) [see ( 72, 76–78)]. Some
researchers argued that there is a bottom-up thalamocortical
network where the AC is modulated by a synaptic depressive
input projected from the thalamus ( 77, 79). In this case, MMN is
a derivative of the N1 suppression when we subtracted the
standard-evoked potential form the deviant-evoked potential.
The subsequent negative de ﬂection of the deviant signal simply
represented a non-adapted evoked response, highlighting a
“release” from the suppression (see Figure 2 ). However, this
hypothesis failed to explain the MMN ﬁndings in some oddball
experiments. For example, if the deviant in an oddball paradigm
is replaced by an omission stimulus, the absence of the expected
tone is still able to induce an MMN when no adaptation could
have occurred ( 80, 81). Additionally, using a local/global
paradigm, studies showed that the violation of local and global
rules would elicit two different MMN signals at the AC and FC,
respectively ( 82). These ﬁndings suggested that there must be a
higher-order process encoding the patterns of sequence and
producing an enhanced response when the encoding rule is
violated ( 83).
In contrast, predictive coding suggested that neurons in the
thalamocortical network have a more sophisticated cognitive
processing to gather sensory information. The standard stimulus,
which is a series of repetitive sounds/tones, would be encoded as
a sequence of patterns by the brain, forming a “prediction” for
A
B
FIGURE 2 | The formation of MMN from the subtraction of standard-evoked
potential from deviant-evoked potential. (A) SSA hypothesized that the MMN
is simply a derivative of the attenuated N1 of the standard. (B) Predictive
coding hypothesized that both adaptation of the standard and deviance
detection of the deviant contributes to the MMN.
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579324
the upcoming stimuli. When the sensory data is matched with
the prediction, the prediction error is minimized, leading to the
neural adaptation. Since the prediction has been shaped by the
standard stimuli, the deviant as a distinctive sensory input would
produce a considerable amount of prediction error. The MMN is,
therefore, an electrophysiological marker re ﬂecting the level of
prediction error when an unexpected stimulus (deviant) is
presented (see Figure 3 ). As a limitation, this simpli ﬁed model
did not address the ﬁring patterns of the prediction neurons.
Therefore, the “prediction error signal ” might indeed represent
the ratio between prediction error and prediction signal or the
net electrophysiological activities of these two clusters
of neurons.
The prediction signal might only be visible as N1 during the
adaptation period when the prediction error is theoretically
minimized. With an early latency (peaked around 100 ms),
adaptation is expected to be localized at the lower level of the
prediction hierarchy formed by the subcortical-cortical network,
involving mainly the belt area of MGB and IC with both the belt
and core areas of the primary AC (A1) ( 84, 85). Previous studies
revealed that the AC can have both excitatory and inhibitory
effects on the MGB ( 86) and IC ( 87). Thus, the AC can suppress
the predicted information from approaching the cerebral cortex
by inhibiting the activities of the thalamus and midbrain when
prediction error input is reduced ( 84, 88).
In addition, neurons at the IC with strong SSA properties
appeared to receive extensive inputs from the AC while those
with no/less SSA properties mainly receive input from the
brainstem nuclei ( 89). Studies using a cooling technique to
deactivate the cortical activity on animals also discovered that
the SSA properties of certain neurons at the IC and MGB would
be reduced while certain proportions of neurons still retained
their SSA sensitivity ( 72, 84). Collectively, adaptation as a key
component of predictive coding and MMN, appeared to be
modulated by a lower order AC-MGB-IC network which
continuously interacts with each other, maintaining the
efﬁciency of sensory processing.
Deviant detection (DD) is another core component of the
MMN signal. Using single-neuron recording, Parras, and
colleagues demonstrated ( 90) on anaesthetized rats that the
AC-MGB-IC network contributes to both the adaptation and
deviance detection of the MMN signal. The prediction error
activities elevated from IC to MGB to AC and from lemniscal to
non-lemniscal regions. Other subcortical regions such as the
cerebellum ( 91) and basal ganglia ( 92) were also known to be
associated with the sensory prediction processing. However, DD
has mainly been linked with the higher-order processing in
predictive coding based on the temporal pro ﬁle of the MMN,
where the lower order response activates earlier (~100 ms) at the
AC while the higher-order DD signal becomes visible in a later
time window at the frontal area [100 –200 ms after the stimulus
onset; ( 93–95)]. The P3a followed by the frontal MMN also
suggested that there could be a switch of attention toward the
deviance ( 96).
Additional studies revealed that deviance detection was
associated with the higher cortical area. An electrocorticographic
(ECoG) study showed that deviance detection signals in the cerebral
cortex are localized to the lateral STG and FC in humans (97). Other
studies argued that the PFC (e.g., ventral prefrontal regions)
contributed to DD when the sensory input projected from the
AC (anterior belt) does not match the existing memory ( 98). The
role of the frontal region in this sort of feedback mechanism is well-
supported by the studies of non-conscious patients. For instance,
patients in the vegetative state showed a reduction in feedback
modulation with the sensory cortex while their feedforward
functioning was still maintained (99, 100).
To sum up, predictive coding provided a comprehensive
explanation to the temporal and spatial pro ﬁle of MMN by the
FIGURE 3 | A diagram indicating the change of prediction error signal during a classical oddball experiment. The repetitive presentations of the standard stim uli
reduce the prediction error signal (decrease neuron ﬁring) feeding to the higher-order area, which leads to the “adaptation” effect. The subsequent deviant tone
elevates the prediction error, which generates the deviance detection input (increase neuron ﬁring). Therefore, the resultant MMN (deviant - standard) consisted of
two neural mechanisms driven by the ﬂuctuation of prediction error signals.
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579325
ﬂuctuation of the prediction error signal, which was modulated
by the cortical and subcortical network in a hierarchical manner.
Associating adaptation and DD with lower-order regions and
higher-order regions respectively were tentative, with no strict
boundary between each neural hierarchy. Intuitively speaking, it
seems logical to think that adaptation serves the function of
gatekeeping at the early sensory pathway to prevent information
overloading. Without excessive data input, the higher-order
sensory cortex should perform the DD more ef ﬁciently. Since
predictive coding assumes the same communication mechanism,
formed by prediction and prediction error, for each neural
structure, the functional speci ﬁcation of adaptation and DD
might be achieved by the differences in neural properties and
possibly the proportion of each type of the neurons along the
neural hierarchy.
VARIOUS FORMS OF ODDBALL
PARADIGM
The deviant evoked response in a classical oddball paradigm is
known to be in ﬂuenced by both adaptation and deviance
detection. By introducing various forms of oddball paradigm
and control task, literatures found that the evoked response,
more precisely speaking, could re ﬂect the cognitive process of
adaptation and deviance detection separately. In the following
section, we brie ﬂyd e s c r i b e7m a j o rM M Np a r a d i g m sa n d
compare their effectiveness in identifying the underlying
mechanism (see Figure 4).
Classical Oddball
Traditionally, the MMN in the classical oddball paradigm is
obtained by subtracting the standard-evoked potential from the
deviant-evoked potential. However, the adaptation effect induced
by the standard tone was known to cause a reduced auditory N1.
By subtracting a standard evoked response with a reduced N1
(peaked at 100 ms) from the deviant evoked response (peaked at
around 100–200 ms), the resultant MMN could be contaminated
by the N1 and hence overestimated.
Many-Standard Control
The many-standard paradigm was developed as a control
paradigm to eliminate the adaptation effect (N1) from MMN.
A simple “many-standard” control consisted of a sequence of
tones [e.g., varied in pitch but ﬁxed duration, loudness and
onset-to-onset intervals ( 78, 101–104)]. Two of the tones were
matched with the pitch of the standard and deviant tone using in
a classical oddball respectively, while the rest of tones have a
random pitch. A many-standard control presents the tones in
FIGURE 4 | The variations of oddball paradigm. The circle symbols indicated whether the MMN would be in ﬂuenced by adaptation or deviance detection. The
double circle indicated that the MMN would give a cleaner representation of adaptation/deviance detection. Classical oddball coupling with many-s tandard and
cascadic-control allows the isolation of deviance detection from adaptation. Without an actual auditory input, an omission deviant would elicit a s ignal that “free” from
adaptation, while MMN in other paradigms would be in ﬂuenced by both mechanisms. *Roving paradigm allows the comparison of MMNs evoked by different length
of standards in which adaptation effect could be investigated. The greyscale indexed the pitch of the stimulus; the arrow indicated the deviant tone ( the dashed
arrow indicated the global deviant).
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579326
pseudo-random order, creat ing a sequence with no known
regularity which prevents the formation of adaptation among
the participants.
Therefore, by comparing the event-related response evoked
by the deviant tone in the classical oddball paradigm with the
response elicited from the tone with the same pitch but presented
in the many-standard sequence (without the reduced N1),
researchers should be able to obtain the “adaptation-free ”
MMN that represents the deviance detection process. On the
other hand, the comparison between the neural response evoked
by the “standard” in classical oddball and the many-standard
paradigm should identify neural signals that indicate the
adaptation effect. This also allows the comparison on two
identical tones, eliminating any confounding effect produced
by the acoustic features (i.e., pitch for a frequency deviant) rather
than the abstract rule of the sequence.
The disadvantage of the many-standard control is that the
randomness of the sequence would generate a considerable
amount of prediction error according to the predicting coding
theory. Therefore, the comparison with the oddball sequence
may give an underestimated deviance detection effect and an
overestimated adaptation effect.
Cascadic Control
With the limitation of a many-standard control, an additional
sequence coupling with the classical oddball and many-standard
paradigm, known as “cascadic-control” was introduced ( 105).
The cascade sequence consisted of a regular train of tones in
increasing or decreasing frequencies. The target control tone
is hidden in a predictable sequence which suppresses the
generation of prediction error from the control sequence. The
descending or ascending cascade control corresponds to
the oddball deviant that has a decreased or increased frequency
respectively. The preceding tones of the control and oddball
sequence are also identical, which makes the cascade a better
control compared to many-standard to identify the deviance
detection process.
Roving
The roving paradigm contains multiple trains of tones in various
frequencies ( 106–108). Each train consists of a random amount
of identical tones separated by regular inter-stimulus-intervals.
The repetition within each train of tones eventually leads to an
adaptation effect; thus, the last tone of the block can be viewed as
a “standard” as in the oddball paradigm. The ﬁrst tone of a train,
on the other hand, indicates a switch of frequency, making it a
natural deviant tone with the same physical properties as the
standard. Similar to standard oddball, the MMN is indicated by
the comparison of standard and deviant evoked response. In
addition, the roving paradigm can examine the build-up of the
adaptation by comparing the MMN caused by the different
numbers of repetitions between the deviant and standard
tone ( 109).
Local-Global
The local-global paradigm typically consists of two sets of
auditory stimuli ( 82, 110). A set of tones, named as local
standard, contains a series of identical tones (e.g., AAAAA).
The repetition of tone A is the local rule of this sequence which
makes the sequence AAAAA ﬁtting the internal rule. Another set
of tone, named as local deviant, also contains a train of identical
tones but the last one is replaced by a different tone (e.g.,
AAAAB). Therefore, the internal rule of repeating tone A in
this sequence is violated by the last tone. By presenting the local
deviant repeatedly (e.g., AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB …), our brain
can identify such sequence as a global-rule, which makes the
local deviant a global-standard. If a rare number of local standard
(AAAAA) is mixed randomly into the train of local deviant (e.g.,
AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB
AAAAA AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB
AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB AAAAA AAAAB …), the
local standard here then appears as violating the global rule,
which turns the local-standard as a global-deviant. By
interchanging the proportion (probability) of the local-deviant
and local-standard, their roles in the global-rule can be swapped.
This paradigm introduced two types of temporal regularities,
that is, the local rule (tone-to-tone transition) and the global rule
(sequence-to-sequence transition). The detection of violating a
local-rule was hypothesized as lower-order processing while the
global-rule was hypothesized to be processed at the higher-order
cortical area. This ﬁts the paradigm into the predictive coding
manner which proposes a hierarchical communication network.
Chao and colleagues showed that the local prediction errors were
generated in the AC while the global prediction errors were
generated in the FC ( 82). Their ECoG connectivity analyses
revealed that local prediction error signals were fed forward to
the AC and that global prediction error signals were fed forward
to the FC. A feedback component from FC to AC for global
prediction errors was found as well.
Omission
All oddball paradigms described above have both standard and
deviant tones. An omission paradigm often couples with other
oddball paradigms as an additional sequence where an omission
deviant replaces the typical frequency deviant ( 110). In other
words, the expected event is omitted (no tone) followed by a train
of standard tones. Since no actual acoustic input is presented, the
evoked response cannot be sensitive to the adaptation effect,
which allows the isolation of deviance detection signal.
Prediction
The prediction task used by Durschmid and colleagues ( 111)i sa
variation of the local-global paradigm, formed by two types of
blocks, the predictable (P) and the unpredictable (U). The fully
predictable blocks consist of the regular repetitions of the local-
deviant (i.e., AAAAB AAAAB AAAAB …), where the location of
the deviant tone (B) can be fully predicted (after the presentation
of 4 As). In contrast, the local-deviant tone (B) does not follow
any global rules in the unpredictable blocks. It appears between 3
and 7 repetitions of the local-standard tone (A). This design also
allows the investigation of local and global rules hierarchically,
ﬁtting the scope of predictive coding.
Recent advancement of methodological (oddball paradigms)
and conceptual (predictive coding) development in MMN has
enabled us to better understand the functional and anatomical
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579327
mechanism underlying it, namely, adaptation/deviance detection
or hierarchical segmentation. This provides a valuable new
perspective to the interpretation of existing neurological data
on MMN and in generating hypotheses about the pathology of
certain psychiatric disorders where MMN has long been used as
a biomarker. Considered the widely diverse MMN ﬁndings and
different pathologies associated with each psychiatric disorder,
we decided to use one clinical condition as an example to
illustrate how such new perspective could be applied to the
existing literature and future studies. Schizophrenia has been
chosen because the classic MMN, which is said to index the pre-
attentive perceptual de ﬁcit, is perceived as a valid biomarker
in schizophrenia.
MISMATCH NEGATIVITY IN
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Reduced auditory MMN ( 104, 112–115), magnetic auditory
MMN ( 116, 117)a n dv i s u a lM M N( 118, 119) in a classic
oddball paradigm is commonly observed on patients suffered
from psychotic disorders. MMN also has the greatest effect size
as a biomarker for schizophrenia amongst P50, N100, and P300
(120). Remarkably, there were signi ﬁcant associations between
MMN amplitudes and psychotic symptom severity in cross-
sectional comparisons ( 121–124), which inspired the possibility
of using MMN amplitudes for clinical prognosis. Some research
groups showed that an increase in MMN amplitude predicted the
clinical remission of people with ultra-high risk for psychosis
(UHR) ( 125, 126). Another longitudinal study revealed that
MMN de ﬁcits might be associated with the negative symptoms
and functional outcomes of the patients with schizophrenia
(127). Unfortunately, these studies did not control medication
dosage as well as other medical care and treatment as
confounders, therefore the actual contribution of MMN can
only be evaluated in larger longitudinal samples with
appropriate confounding control.
Several studies have attempted to investigate the association
between MMN amplitude and the trajectory of psychosis
development: adolescent preclinical psychotic-like experiences
(PLEs), UHR, ﬁrst-episode psychosis (FEP), ﬁrst-episode
schizophrenia (FESZ), and chronic schizophrenia. Cross-sectional
studies have shown that MMN amplitude evoked by duration
deviants (dMMN) was signi ﬁcantly reduced in earlier clinical
stages of psychosis - UHR and FEP, compared to healthy
controls, while such differences were not observed using
frequency deviants (fMMN) ( 113, 121, 128–134). Reduced
dMMN amplitude can also be observed on adolescents having
PLEs (135) and people with UHR who later converted to psychosis
(130). The attenuation of a double (duration + frequency) deviants
evoked MMN also predicted the conversion of UHR to FEP (136).
Collectively, dMMN attenuation can be observed across different
stages of psychosis, making it a valuable trait marker.
However, the association between MMN and the development
of psychosis are still lacking in support from longitudinal
investigations. Some longitudinal ﬁndings revealed a progressive
reduction of MMN amplitude in FESZ (137, 138)b u tn o ti nc h r o n i c
schizophrenia ( 139). Salisbury and colleagues also found a
progressive reduction of fMMN alongside the volume decrease at
the left Heschl ’s gyrus for patients with schizophrenia instead of
bipolar disorder and healthy controls (138). However, theseﬁndings
are somewhat controversial with no group difference nor
progressive reduction being seen between UHR, FEP, and control
groups ( 115). A similar trend has been reported for dMMN
(140)b u tn o ti no t h e r s( 115, 141). Whether this controversy
originates from the difference in measurement procedure,
recruitment, the de ﬁnition of clinical stages or follow-up period
remained unanswered.
Compared to schizophrenia, there were fewer examinations on
MMN for other psychiatric disorders. Cross-disease comparisons
have shown that patients with bipolar disorder had a decreased
dMMN amplitude similar to those with schizophrenia compared
to healthy controls (123). Another studied showed a contradictory
ﬁnding in which their patients with bipolar disorder and major
depressive disorder had no signi ﬁcant dMMN amplitude
reduction ( 142). A review of the MMN study on the bipolar
spectrum has proposed that bipolar disease could lead to an
intermediate level reduction on MMN in-between those with
schizophrenia and the healthy controls ( 143)a l t h o u g ha
systematic model is yet to be developed due to the unclear
relationship between MMN and the subtypes (as well as
medication status) of bipolar disorder ( 144, 145). MMN for the
major depressive disorder had also been investigated, yet again, the
results were inconsistent across the literatures ( 146–148).
Recent cross-disease multi-modal studies have proposed that
the deﬁcits in MMN amplitude could be driven by the structural
change at speci ﬁc brain regions rather than the disease
pathology. This idea is supported by the intermediate dMMN
amplitude decrease of patients with bipolar disorder compared to
patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls, while the
amplitude was associated with the cortical thickness of the
right STG ( 149), suggesting that the MMN amplitude could
rather indicate the de ﬁcit of higher-order auditory functions in
the STG irrespective of the spectrum of the psychiatric disorders.
A functional MRI study showed that the deviant-induced BOLD
signal for patients with schizophrenia was reduced in a few
cortical areas and subcortical areas (IC, thalamus, AC, and PFC)
and those with major depressive disorder only had the reduced
BOLD on the PFC ( 73). Some researchers argued that there
could be broader pathophysiology for MMN ( 143 ), and
therefore, MMN should not be used as a biomarker exclusively
for schizophrenia. With our understanding of the formation of
MMN using predictive coding, it appears that MMN can index
different psychopathology that are shared across different
psychotic and related disorders.
PATHOLOGY OF SCHIZOPHRENIA FROM
A PREDICTIVE CODING PERSPECTIVE
The classiﬁcation of most psychiatric disorders nowadays such as
the Diagnostic and Statis t i c a lM a n u a l( D S M - V )a n d
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579328
International Classi ﬁcation of Diseases (ICD-10) diagnoses the
presence or absence of a disorder based on a list of categorical
symptoms. For example, schizophrenia is characterized by
positive symptoms such as delusions and hallucinations.
Based on predictive coding theory, some researchers argued
that exaggerating or overly precise prior beliefs renders a sensory
noise into an organized and reasoned percept ( 150). Since the
precision of the sensory data and the prior belief (memory)
would both be inferred to the posterior (updated perception), a
relatively high prior belief would reduce the in ﬂuence of the
sensory data on the resultant perception. A recent study showed
support to this notion by building prior belief through the
repeated presentation of a vis ual cue concurrently with an
auditory tone ( 151). They demonstrated that it was easier for
the visual cue (in the absence of the actual tone) to induce
hallucinatory tones as well as activations in certain cortical areas,
such as AC, posterior superior temporal sulcus and anterior
cingulate cortex, on psychotic patients who have hallucination
symptoms. However, this appears as contradictory to some early
studies of schizophrenia, where patients are less susceptible to
hollow-mask illusion (a concave mask creating an illusion of
convex face) ( 152, 153). Using a dynamic causal model, the
authors showed that patients with schizophrenia had a stronger
feedforward modulation from the primary visual cortex to the
lateral occipital complex, implying a weak inference from learned
prior beliefs compared to the sensory input. Although the above
two examples may highlight two completely different
neuropathology, the over/under reliance on prior belief could
co-exist through a failed prediction error feedback mechanism.
The failure of prediction error feedback could distort
perceptions by disrupting both the top-down modulation and
bottom-up sensory projection. Such de ﬁcit of patients with
schizophrenia in prediction error was more clearly
demonstrated by MMN studies using other forms of oddball
paradigm. In a local-global o ddball study, patients with
schizophrenia showed reduced MMN to both the local and
global deviant compared to healthy control ( 154). Although
this paradigm could not distinguish repetition suppression and
deviance detection from one to each other, it revealed that the
prediction error de ﬁcit of schizophrenia covers both the lower-
level and higher-level processing layer. The reduced MMN was
also shown in another study using roving paradigm ( 109, 155).
Interestingly, the patients ’ MMN only become visible with
increasing repetitions of the standard tones. With a longer
sequence of standard, MMN is believed to be predominated by
the “release” of SSA-sensitive N1, which suggested that the SSA
function for schizophrenia remains intact. This ﬁnding is
consistent with other studies using many-standard control and
omission deviant, which revealed that the prediction error for
schizophrenia was mainly in ﬂuenced by deviance detection
rather than repetition suppression ( 154, 156, 157).
Patients with schizophrenia also had a progressive volume
reduction in STG ( 158), a site known to associate with deviance
detection (97). Previous research has also revealed that MMN is
associated with the N-methyl-D-aspartate glutamate (NMDA)
system ( 159–162). For example, an animal study showed that
ketamine as an NMDA-antagonist can suppress both the local-
and global-deviant triggered MMNs ( 163). Such association
between MMN and NMDA, however, is only found in the
deviance detection process, but not adaptation ( 102). This
appeared to be consistent with the NMDA receptor (NMDA)
hypofunction model on schizophrenia, which proposed that the
pathology of schizophrenia involved a dysfunction or a blockage
of the NMDA receptor ( 164–168).
It is worth mentioning tha t the hyperactivity in the
dopaminergic system is tied to positive symptoms of
schizophrenia such as verbal hallucination and persecutory
delusion ( 169
, 170) since some of the positive symptoms can
be induced by dopamine stimulants (e.g., methamphetamine
administration) and most of the antipsychotics that act as D2
receptor (D2R) antagonists for positive symptoms. Aberrant
reward response was often associated with the above positive
symptoms; thus, the dysfunction and imbalance of D1 receptor
(D1R) and D2R were presumably linked to reward prediction
error de ﬁcit ( 171–174). Such de ﬁcit prevents our brain from
updating and correcting the internal prediction model that is
modulated by reward which leads to false or hallucinatory
percepts ( 169).
Previous studies have hypothesized that the dopaminergic
pathway in reward system relies on the valence coding function
of D1R and D2R: the former is responsible for the positive, while
the latter is for the negative valence ( 175). Considering the
clinical pharmacological ﬁndings of D2R and the functions of
serotonin, positive and depressive symptoms were once
expressed as the imbalance of D1R and D2R functions, with
serotonin as a modulator for dopamine signalling ( 176).
However, a recent study found that during the learning
process, D1R in the nucleus accumbens and D2R were
responsible for the generalization and discrimination phrases
respectively ( 177). The excessive D1 and insuf ﬁcient D2
activation may lead to overgeneralization that results in false
belief and delusions, whereas the opposite may inhibit beliefs
and prediction.
Collectively, we demonstrated how the impaired function of
prediction contributes to psychiatric disorder/symptoms using
schizophrenia as an example from the predictive coding
perspective. The de ﬁcit of deviance detection in psychotic
disorder as shown in MMN studies indicated that psychotic
symptoms could originate from the failed sensory prediction
located at the higher cortical level. Such impairments could be
associated with the dopaminergic system that would stop sensory
cues to be encoded into experiences and beliefs ( 172), and thus
disrupting the sensory prediction scheme, causing delusions or
other positive symptoms.
CONCLUSION
Predictive coding models perceive MMN as an indicator of
neuronal prediction error in a hierarchical structure. Although
this model may have overstated the actual neural responses of
prediction error, it provides a simple working model for researchers
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5579329
to concisely examine the functional or anatomical impairment of
different neuropsychiatric population. Given a large number of
r e l e v a n ts t u d i e s ,w eb e l i e v et h a ti nt h ef u t u r eo ft h eﬁeld, efforts
should be made to obtain knowledge with more in-depth “details”
instead of staying with its “simplicity” and “elegance”. Since
prediction and prediction error were hypothesized to dynamically
interact at each hierarchy, an obvious future direction could focus
on the prediction signal. This could be achieved by isolating the
adaptation mechanism from MMN using the classical oddball
paradigm in combination with the many-standard control and
cascadic control in which prediction error is minimized. More
importantly, researchers seemed to accept the logic of neural
arithmetics (i.e., prediction error = sensory input - prediction),
despite the fact that how such computation could be carried out at
each neuronal level are completely unknown. Considered the cost of
monitoring the neural activities at the cellular level, re ﬁning and
utilizing oddball paradigms such as local-global or prediction
paradigm to achieve hierarchal segmentation appears as a sensible
solution to unveil the full picture of sensory prediction.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CF and WL contributed to writing the draft manuscript. TU and
SK contributed to conceptualization of this review and reviewing
the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and
approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This research was supported by the Agency for Medical Research
and Development (AMED) under grant numbers
JP20dm0207069 and by the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS) KAKENHI grant numbers 19H03579 and
19H04878. This study was also supported by the University of
Tokyo Center for Integrative Science of Human Behavior
(CiSHuB) and the International Research Center for
Neurointelligence (WPI-IRCN) at the University of Tokyo
Institutes for Advanced Study (UTIAS).
REFERENCES
1. Beer RD. The dynamics of brain –body–environment systems: A status report.
In: Calvo P, Gomila T, editors. Handbook of Cognitive Science: An Embodied
Approach. San Diego: Elsevier (2008). p. 99 –120. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-
046616-3.00006-2
2. Friston K, Kiebel S. Predictive coding under the free-energy principle. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2009) 364(1521):1211 –21. doi: 10.1098/
rstb.2008.0300
3. Rao RP, Ballard DH. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional
interpretation of some extra-classical receptive- ﬁeld effects. Nat Neurosci
(1999) 2(1):79 –87. doi: 10.1038/4580
4. Spratling MW. A review of predictive coding algorithms. Brain Cognit (2017)
112:92–7. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2015.11.003
5. Friston K. Does predictive coding have a future? Nat Neurosci (2018) 21
(8):1019–21. doi: 10.1038/s41593-018-0200-7
6. Aitchison L, Lengyel M. With or without you: predictive coding and Bayesian
inference in the brain. Curr Opin Neurobiol (2017) 46:219 –27. doi: 10.1016/
j.conb.2017.08.010
7. Lee TS, Mumford D. Hierarchical Bayesian inference in the visual cortex.
J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis (2003) 20(7):1434 –48. doi: 10.1364/
JOSAA.20.001434
8. Weilnhammer V, Stuke H, Hesselmann G, Sterzer P, Schmack K. A predictive
coding account of bistable perception - a model-based fMRI study. PloS
Comput Biol (2017) 13(5):e1005536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005536
9. Friston KJ, Stephan KE. Free-energy and the brain. Synthese (2007) Dec159
(3):417–58. doi: 10.1007/s11229-007-9237-y
10. Bubic A, von Cramon DY, Schubotz RI. Prediction, cognition and the brain.
Front Hum Neurosci (2010) 4:25. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2010.00025
11. Shadmehr R, Smith MA, Krakauer JW. Error correction, sensory prediction,
and adaptation in motor control. Annu Rev Neurosci (2010) 33(1):89 –108.
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153135
12. Cheer JF, Aragona BJ, Heien ML, Seipel AT, Carelli RM, Wightman RM.
Coordinated accumbal dopamine release and neural activity drive goal-
directed behavior. Neuron (2007) 54(2):237–44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.
03.021
13. Goto Y, Grace AA. Dopaminergic modulation of limbic and cortical drive of
nucleus accumbens in goal-directed behavior. Nat Neurosci (2005) Jun8
(6):805–12. doi: 10.1038/nn1471
14. Bastiaansen MC, Böcker KB, Cluitmans PJ, Brunia CH. Event-related
desynchronization related to the ant icipation of a stim ulus providing
knowledge of results. Clin Neurophysiol (1999) 110(2):250 –60. doi:
10.1016/S0013-4694(98)00122-9
15. Go ́mez CM, Vaquero E, Vázquez-Marrufo M. A neurocognitive model for
short-term sensory and motor preparatory activity in humans. Psicol
(Valencia) (2004) 25(2):217 –29.
16. Sanmiguel I, Saupe K, Schröger E. I know what is missing here:
electrophysiological prediction error signals elicited by omissions of
predicted “what” but not “when”. Front Hum Neurosci (2013) 7:407. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2013.00407
17. Carlsson K, Petrovic P, Skare S, Petersson KM, Ingvar M. Tickling
expectations: neural processing in anticipation of a sensory stimulus.
J Cognit Neurosci (2000) 12(4):691 –703. doi: 10.1162/089892900562318
18. Hohwy J. Attention and conscious perception in the hypothesis testing
brain. Front Psychol (2012) 3:96. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00096
19. Lotter W, Kreiman G, Cox D. Deep predictive coding networks for video
prediction and unsupe rvised learning. In: Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Learning Representations ; 2017 Apr 24-26;
Toulon, France: ICLR Conference Track Proceedings (2017). Available at:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1ewdt9xe.
20. Seth AK. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends
Cognit Sci (2013) 17(11):565 –73. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
21. Wacongne C, Changeux JP, Dehaene S. A neuronal model of predictive
coding accounting for the mismatch negativity. JN e u r o s c i(2012) 32
(11):3665–78. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5003-11.2012
22. Fogelson N, Litvak V, Peled A, Fernandez-del-Olmo M, Friston K. The functional
anatomy of schizophrenia: A dynamic causal modeling study of predictive coding.
Schizophr Res(2014) 158(1-3):204–12. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2014.06.011
23. Pellicano E, Burr D. When the world becomes ‘too real ’:aB a y e s i a n
explanation of autistic perception. Trends Cognit Sci (2012) 16(10):504 –
10. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.009
24. Wacongne C. A predictive coding account of MMN reduction in schizophrenia.
Biol Psychol (2016) 116:68–74. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsycho.2015.10.011
25. Engel-Yeger B, Muzio C, Rinosi G, Solano P, Geoffroy PA, Pompili M, et al.
Extreme sensory processing patterns and their relation with clinical
conditions among individuals with major affective disorders. Psychiatry
Res (2016) 236:112 –8. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.12.022
26. De Berardis D, Fornaro M, Orsolini L, Valchera A, Carano A, Vellante F,
et al. Alexithymia and suicide risk in psychiatric disorders: a mini-review.
Front Psychiatry (2017) 8:148. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2017.00148
27. Palser ER, Palmer CE, Galvez-Pol A, Hannah R, Fotopoulou A, Kilner JM.
Alexithymia mediates the relationship between interoceptive sensibility
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 55793210
and anxiety. PloS One (2018) 13(9):e0203212. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0203212
28. Gershman SJ, Uchida N. Believing in dopamine. Nat Rev Neurosci (2019) 20
(11):703–14. doi: 10.1038/s41583-019-0220-7
29. Trapp S, Bar M. Prediction, context, and competition in visual recognition.
Ann N Y Acad Sci (2015) 1339(1):190 –8. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12680
30. Hosoya T, Baccus SA, Meister M. Dynamic predictive coding by the retina.
Nature (2005) 436(7047):71 –7. doi: 10.1038/nature03689
31. Spratling MW. Unsupervised learning of generative and discriminative
weights encoding elementary image components in a predictive coding
model of cortical function. Neural Comput (2012) 24(1):60 –103. doi:
10.1162/NECO_a_00222
32. Treisman AM, Gelade G. A feature-integration theory of attention. Cognit
Psychol (1980) 12(1):97 –136. doi: 10.1016/0010-0285(80)90005-5
33. Atick JJ. Entropy minimization: A design principle for sensory perception?
Int J Neural Syst (1992) 3 supp01:81 –90. doi: 10.1142/S0129065792000413
34. Srinivasan MV, Laughlin SB, Dubs A. Predictive coding: a fresh view of
inhibition in the retina. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (1982) 216(1205):427–59.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1982.0085
35. Dan Y, Atick JJ, Reid RC. Ef ﬁcient coding of natural scenes in the lateral
geniculate nucleus: experimental test of a computational theory. J Neurosci
(1996) 16(10):3351 –62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-10-03351.1996
36. Goldberg ME, Bisley JW, Powell KD, Gottlieb J. Saccades, salience and
attention: the role of the lateral intraparietal area in visual behavior. Prog
Brain Res (2006) 155:157 –75. doi: 10.1016/S0079-6123(06)55010-1
37. Treue S. Visual attention: the where, what, how and why of saliency. Curr
Opin Neurobiol (2003) 13(4):428 –32. doi: 10.1016/S0959-4388(03)00105-3
38. Bastos AM, Usrey WM, Adams RA, Mangun GR, Fries P, Friston KJ.
Canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron (2012) 76(4):695 –
711. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.10.038
39. Kanai R, Komura Y, Shipp S, Friston K. Cerebral hierarchies: predictive
processing, precision and the pulvinar. Philos Trans R Soc B: Biol Sci (2015)
370(1668):20140169. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0169
40. Summer ﬁeld C, Egner T. Expectation (and attention) in visual cognition.
Trends Cognit Sci (2009) 13(9):403 –9. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2009.06.003
41. Runeson S. Visual prediction of collision with natural and nonnatural motion
functions. Percept Psychophys (1975) 18(4):261–6. doi: 10.3758/BF03199372
42. Nijhawan R. Visual prediction: psychophysics and neurophysiology of
compensation for time delays. Behav Brain Sci (2008) 31(2):179 –98. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X08003804
43. Wilson HR, Ferrera VP, Yo C. A psychophysically motivated model for two-
dimensional motion perception. Vis Neurosci (1992) 9(1):79 –97. doi:
10.1017/S0952523800006386
44. Moore T, Fallah M. Control of eye movements and spatial attention. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA (2001) 98(3):1273 –6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.98.3.1273
45. Moore T, Armstrong KM. Selective gating of visual signals by
microstimulation of frontal cortex. Nature (2003) 421(6921):370 –3. doi:
10.1038/nature01341
46. Ghose GM, Maunsell JH. Attentional modulation in visual cortex depends
on task timing. Nature (2002) 419(6907):616–20. doi: 10.1038/nature01057
47. Janssen P, Shadlen MN. A representation of the hazard rate of elapsed time
in macaque area LIP. Nat Neurosci (2005) 8(2):234–41. doi: 10.1038/nn1386
48. Stefanics G, Astikainen P, Czigler I. Visual mismatch negativity (vMMN): a
prediction error signal in the visual modality. Front Hum Neurosci (2015)
8:1074. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.01074
49. Hamm JP, Yuste R. Somatostatin interneurons control a key component of
mismatch negativity in mouse visual cortex. Cell Rep (2016) 1916(3):597 –
604. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.06.037
50. Blank H, Davis MH. Prediction errors but not sharpened signals simulate
multivoxel fMRI patterns during speech perception. PloS Biol (2016) 14(11):
e1002577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002577
51. Gagnepain P, Henson RN, Davis MH. Temporal predictive codes for spoken
words in auditory cortex. Curr Biol (2012) 22(7):615 –21. doi: 10.1016/
j.cub.2012.02.015
52. Näätänen R, Lehtokoski A, Lennes M, Cheour M, Huotilainen M, Iivonen A,
et al. Language-speci ﬁc phoneme representations revealed by electric and
magnetic brain responses. Nature (1997) 385(6615):432 –4. doi: 10.1038/
385432a0
53. Koelsch S, Vuust P, Friston K. Predictive processes and the peculiar case of
music. Trends Cognit Sci (2019) 23(1):63–77. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.10.006
54. Näätänen R, Gaillard AW, Mäntysalo S. Early selective-attention effect on
evoked potential reinterpreted. Acta Psychol (Amst) (1978) 42(4):313 –29.
doi: 10.1016/0001-6918(78)90006-9
55. Kremla ́ček J, Kreegipuu K, Tales A, Astikainen P, Põldver N, Näätänen R,
et al. Visual mismatch negativity (vMMN): A review and meta-analysis of
studies in psychiatric and neurological disorders. Cortex (2016) 80:76 –112.
doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2016.03.017
56. Stefanics G, Kremla ́ček J, Czigler I. Visual mismatch negativity: a
predictive coding view. Front Hum Neurosci (2014) 8:666. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00666
57. Light GA, Swerdlow NR. Future cli nical uses of neurophysiological
biomarkers to predict and monitor treatment response for schizophrenia.
Ann N Y Acad Sci (2015) 1344(1):105 –19. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12730
5 8 .S q u i r e sN K ,S q u i r e sK C ,H i l l y a r dS A .T wo varieties of long-latency positive
waves evoked by unpredictable auditory stimuli in man.Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol(1975) 38(4):387–401. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(75)90263-1
59. Näätänen R, Paavilainen P, Tiitinen H, Jiang D, Alho K. Attention and
memory. Psychophysiol (1993) 30(5):436 –50. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
8986.1993.tb02067.x
60. Lee M, Sehatpour P, Hoptman MJ, Lakatos P, Dias EC, Kantrowitz JT, et al.
Neural mechanisms of mismatch negativity dysfunction in schizophrenia.
Mol Psychiatry (2017) 22(11):1585 –93. doi: 10.1038/mp.2017.3
61. Alho K. Cerebral generators of mismatch negativity (MMN) and its
magnetic counterpart (MMNm) elicited by sound changes. Ear Hear
(1995) 16(1):38 –51. doi: 10.1097/00003446-199502000-00004
62. Molholm S, Ritter W, Javitt DC, Foxe JJ. Multisensory visual –auditory object
recognition in humans: a high-density electrical mapping study. Cereb
Cortex (2004) 14(4):452 –65. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhh007
63. Giard MH, Lavikahen J, Reinikainen K, Perrin F, Bertrand O, Pernier J, et al.
Separate representation of stimulus frequency, intensity, and duration in
auditory sensory memory: an event-related potential and dipole-model
analysis. J Cognit Neurosci (1995) 7(2):133–43. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1995.7.2.133
64. Molholm S, Martinez A, Ritter W, Javitt DC, Foxe JJ. The neural circuitry of
pre-attentive auditory change-detection: an fMRI study of pitch and
duration mismatch negativity generators. Cereb Cortex (2005) 15(5):545 –
51. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhh155
65. Paavilainen P, Alho K, Reinikainen K, Sams M, Näätänen R. Right hemisphere
dominance of different mismatch negativities. Electroencephalogr Clin
Neurophysiol (1991) 78(6):466–79. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(91)90064-B
66. Schröger E. Measurement and interpretation of the mismatch negativity.
Behav Res Methods Instrum Comput (1998) 30(1):131 –45. doi: 10.3758/
BF03209423
67. Giard MH, Perrin F, Pernier J, Bouchet P. Brain generators implicated in the
processing of auditory stimulus deviance: a topographic event-related
potential study. Psychophysiology (1990) 27(6):627 –40. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-
8986.1990.tb03184.x
68. Jemel B, Achenbach C, Müller BW, Röpcke B, Oades RD. Mismatch
negativity results from bilateral asymmetric dipole sources in the frontal
and temporal lobes. Brain Topogr (2002) 15(1):13 –27. doi: 10.1023/
A:1019944805499
69. Lappe C, Steinsträter O, Pantev C. A beamformer analysis of MEG data
reveals frontal generators of the musically elicited mismatch negativity. PloS
One (2013) 8(4):e61296. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061296
70. Näätänen R, Jacobsen T, Winkler I. Memory-based or afferent processes in
mismatch negativity (MMN): a review of the evidence. Psychophysiology
(2005) 42(1):25 –32. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2005.00256.x
71. Rinne T, Alho K, Ilmoniemi RJ, Virtanen J, Näätänen R. Separate time
behaviors of the temporal and front al mismatch negativity sources.
Neuroimage (2000) 12(1):14 –9. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2000.0591
72. Antunes FM, Malmierca MS. An overview of stimulus-speci ﬁc adaptation in
the auditory thalamus. Brain Topogr (2014) 27(4):480 –99. doi: 10.1007/
s10548-013-0342-6
73. Gaebler AJ, Zweerings J, Koten JWJr, König AA, Turetsky BI, Zvyagintsev M,
et al. Impaired Subcortical Detection of Auditory Changes in Schizophrenia
but Not in Major Depression. Schizophr Bull (2020) 46(1):193 –201. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbz027
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 55793211
74. Ruusuvirta T, Astikainen P, Wikgren J, Nokia M. Hippocampus responds to
auditory change in rabbits. Neuroscience (2010) 170(1):232–7. doi: 10.1016/
j.neuroscience.2010.06.062
75. Ruusuvirta T, Lipponen A, Pellinen E, Penttonen M, Astikainen P. Auditory
cortical and hippocampal-system mismatch responses to duration deviants
in urethane-anesthetized rats. PloS One (2013) 8(1):e54624. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0054624
76. Fishman YI. The mechanisms and meaning of the mismatch negativity.
Brain Topogr (2014) 27(4):500 –26. doi: 10.1007/s10548-013-0337-3
77. May PJ, Tiitinen H. Mismatch negativity (MMN), the deviance-elicited
auditory de ﬂection, explained. Psychophysiology (2010) 47(1):66 –122. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00856.x
78. Fishman YI, Steinschneider M. Searching for the mismatch negativity in
primary auditory cortex of the awake monkey: deviance detection or
stimulus speci ﬁc adaptation? JN e u r o s c i(2012) 32(45):15747 –58. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2835-12.2012
79. Wehr M, Zador AM. Synaptic mechanisms of forward suppression in rat
auditory cortex.Neuron (2005) 47(3):437–45. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.06.009
80. Horva ́th J, Czigler I, Jacobsen T, Maess B, Schröger E, Winkler I. MMN or
no MMN: no magnitude of deviance effect on the MMN amplitude.
Psychophysiology (2008) 45(1):60 –9. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.2007.00599.x
81. Yabe H, Tervaniemi M, Reinikainen K, Näätänen R. Temporal window of
integration revealed by MMN to sound omission. Neuroreport (1997) 8
(8):1971–4. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199705260-00035
82. Chao ZC, Takaura K, Wang L, Fujii N, Dehaene S. Large-scale cortical
networks for hierarchical prediction and prediction error in the primate
brain. Neuron (2018) 100(5):1252 –66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.10.004
83. Carbajal GV, Malmierca MS. The neuronal basis of predictive coding along the
auditory pathway: from the subcortical roots to cortical deviance detection.
Trends Hear (2018) 22:2331216518784822. doi: 10.1177/2331216518784822
84. Malmierca MS, Anderson LA, Antunes FM. The cortical modulation of
stimulus-speciﬁc adaptation in the auditory midbrain and thalamus: a
potential neuronal correlate for predictive coding. Front Syst Neurosci
(2015) 9:19. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00019
85. Yarden TS, Nelken I. Stimulus-speci ﬁc adaptation in a recurrent network
model of primary auditory cortex. PloS Comput Biol (2017) 13(3):e1005437.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005437
86. He J. Corticofugal modulation of the auditory thalamus. Exp Brain Res
(2003) 153(4):579 –90. doi: 10.1007/s00221-003-1680-5
87. Herna ́ndez O, Rees A, Malmierca MS. A GABAergic component in the
commissure of the inferior colliculus in rat. Neuroreport (2006) 17
(15):1611–4. doi: 10.1097/01.wnr.0000236857.70715.be
88. Malmierca MS, Sanchez-Vives MV, Escera C, Bendixen A. Neuronal
adaptation, novelty detection and regularity encoding in audition. Front
Syst Neurosci
(2014) 8:111. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00111
89. Ayala YA, Udeh A, Dutta K, Bishop D, Malmierca MS, Oliver DL.
Differences in the strength of cortical and brainstem inputs to SSA and
non-SSA neurons in the inferior colliculus. Sci Rep (2015) 5(1):10383. doi:
10.1038/srep10383
90. Parras GG, Nieto-Diego J, Carbajal GV, Valde ́s-Baizabal C, Escera C,
Malmierca MS. Neurons along the auditory pathway exhibit a hierarchical
organization of prediction error. Nat Commun (2017) 8(1):2148. doi:
10.1038/s41467-017-02038-6
91. Ohmae S, Uematsu A, Tanaka M. Temporally speci ﬁc sensory signals for the
detection of stimulus omission in the primate deep cerebellar nuclei.
J Neurosci (2013) 33(39):15432–41. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1698-13.2013
92. Kameda M, Ohmae S, Tanaka M. Entrained neuronal activity to periodic
visual stimuli in the primate striatum compared with the cerebellum. eLife
(2019) 8:8. doi: 10.7554/eLife.48702
93. Garrido MI, Kilner JM, Stephan KE, Friston KJ. The mismatch negativity: a
review of underlying mechanisms. Clin Neurophysiol (2009) 120(3):453–63.
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2008.11.029
94. Sikkens T, Bosman CA, Olcese U. The role of top-down modulation in shaping
sensory processing across brain states: implications for consciousness.Front Syst
Neurosci (2019) 13:31. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2019.00031
95. Restuccia D, Della Marca G, Marra C, Rubino M, Valeriani M. Attentional
load of the primary task in ﬂuences the frontal but not the temporal
generators of mismatch negativity. Brain Res Cognit Brain Res (2005) 25
(3):891–9. doi: 10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.09.023
96. Doeller CF, Opitz B, Mecklinger A, Krick C, Reith W, Schröger E. Prefrontal
cortex involvement in preattentive auditory deviance detection:
neuroimaging and electrophysiological evidence. Neuroimage (2003) 20
(2):1270–82. doi: 10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00389-6
97. Ishishita Y, Kunii N, Shimada S, Ibayashi K, Tada M, Kirihara K, et al.
Deviance detection is the dominant component of auditory contextual
processing in the lateral superior temporal gyrus: A human ECoG study.
Hum Brain Mapp (2019) 40(4):1184 –94. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24438
98. Romanski LM, Tian B, Fritz J, Mishkin M, Goldman-Rakic PS, Rauschecker
JP. Dual streams of auditory afferents target multiple domains in the primate
prefrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci (1999) 2(12):1131 –6. doi: 10.1038/16056
99. Boly M, Garrido MI, Gosseries O, Bruno MA, Boveroux P, Schnakers C, et al.
Preserved feedforward but impaired top-down processes in the vegetative state.
Science (2011) 332(6031):858–62. doi: 10.1126/science.1202043
100. Ham BK, Chen J, Yan Y, Lucas WJ. Insights into plant phosphate sensing
and signaling. Curr Opin Biotechnol (2018) 49:1 –9. doi: 10.1016/
j.copbio.2017.07.005
101. Althen H, Grimm S, Escera C. Fast detection of unexpected sound intensity
decrements as revealed by human evoked potentials. PloS One (2011) 6(12):
e28522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028522
102. Farley BJ, Quirk MC, Doherty JJ, Christian EP. Stimulus-speci ﬁc adaptation
in auditory cortex is an NMDA-independent process distinct from the
sensory novelty encoded by the mismatch negativity. J Neurosci (2010) 30
(49):16475–84. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2793-10.2010
103. Schröger E, Wolff C. Mismatch response of the human brain to changes in
sound location. Neuroreport
(1996) 7(18):3005 –8. doi: 10.1097/00001756-
199611250-00041
104. Tada M, Kirihara K, Mizutani S, Uka T, Kunii N, Koshiyama D, et al.
Mismatch negativity (MMN) as a tool for translational investigations into
early psychosis: A review. Int J Psychophysiol (2019) 145:5–14. doi: 10.1016/
j.ijpsycho.2019.02.009
105. Ruhnau P, Herrmann B, Schröger E. Finding the right control: the mismatch
negativity under investigation. Clin Neurophysiol (2012) 123(3):507–12. doi:
10.1016/j.clinph.2011.07.035
106. Baldeweg T. ERP repetition effects and mismatch negativity generation: a
predictive coding perspective. J Psychophysiol (2007) 21(3-4):204 –13. doi:
10.1027/0269-8803.21.34.204
107. Leung S, Greenwood L, Michie P, Croft R. The role of stimulus train length in
mismatch negativity (MMN) abnormalities in schizophrenia: A comparison
of the’roving’and’oddball’MMN paradigms. In: XII International Conference
on Cognitive Neuroscience . 2014 Jul 27-31; Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
ICON-XII Conference Abstract (2015). doi: 10.3389/conf.fnhum.
2015.217.00153
108. Schmidt A, Bachmann R, Kometer M, Csomor PA, Stephan KE, Seifritz E,
et al. Mismatch negativity encoding of prediction errors predicts S-ketamine-
induced cognitive impairments. Neuropsychopharmacology (2012) 37
(4):865–75. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.261
109. McCleery A, Mathalon DH, Wynn JK, Roach BJ, Hellemann GS, Marder SR,
et al. Parsing components of auditory predictive coding in schizophrenia
using a roving standard mismatch negativity paradigm. Psychol Med (2019)
49(7):1195–206. doi: 10.1017/S0033291718004087
110. Wacongne C, Labyt E, van Wassenhove V, Bekinschtein T, Naccache L,
Dehaene S. Evidence for a hierarchy of predictions and prediction errors in
human cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (2011) 108(51):20754 –9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1117807108
111. Dürschmid S, Edwards E, Reichert C, Dewar C, Hinrichs H, Heinze HJ, et al.
Hierarchy of prediction errors for auditory events in human temporal and
frontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA (2016) 113(24):6755–60. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1525030113
112. Erickson MA, Ruf ﬂe A, Gold JM. A meta-analysis of mismatch negativity in
schizophrenia: from clinical risk to disease speci ﬁcity and progression. Biol
Psychiatry (2016) 79(12):980–7. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.025
113. Nagai T, Tada M, Kirihara K, Araki T, Jinde S, Kasai K. Mismatch negativity
as a “translatable” brain marker toward early intervention for psychosis: a
review. Front Psychiatry (2013) 4:115. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00115
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 55793212
114. Umbricht D, Krljes S. Mismatch negativity in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.
Schizophr Res (2005) 76(1):1 –23. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2004.12.002
115. Koshiyama D, Kirihara K, Tada M, Nagai T, Koike S, Suga M, et al. Duration
and frequency mismatch negativity shows no progressive reduction in early
stages of psychosis. Schizophr Res (2017) 190:32 –8. doi: 10.1016/
j.schres.2017.03.015
116. Näätänen R, Kähkönen S. Central auditory dysfunction in schizophrenia as
revealed by the mismatch negativity (MMN) and its magnetic equivalent
MMNm: a review. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol (2009) 12(1):125 –35. doi:
10.1017/S1461145708009322
117. Suga M, Nishimura Y, Kawakubo Y, Yumoto M, Kasai K.
Magnetoencephalographic recording of auditory mismatch negativity in
response to duration and frequency deviants in a single session in patients
with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (2016) 70(7):295 –302. doi:
10.1111/pcn.12397
118. Neuhaus AH, Brandt ES, Goldberg TE, Bates JA, Malhotra AK. Evidence for
impaired visual prediction error in schizophrenia. Schizophr Res (2013) 147
(2-3):326–30. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2013.04.004
119. Urban A, Kremla ́cek J, Masopust J, Libiger J. Visual mismatch negativity
among patients with schizophrenia. Schizophr Res (2008) 102(1-3):320 –8.
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.03.014
120. Turetsky BI, Bilker WB, Siegel SJ, Kohler CG, Gur RE. Pro ﬁle of auditory
information-processing de ﬁcits in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Res (2009) 165
(1-2):27–37. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2008.04.013
121. Nagai T, Tada M, Kirihara K, Yahata N, Hashimoto R, Araki T, et al.
Auditory mismatch negativity and P3a in response to duration and
frequency changes in the early stages of psychosis. Schizophr Res (2013)
150(2-3):547–54. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2013.08.005
122. Shiga T, Horikoshi S, Kanno K, Kanno-Nozaki K, Hikita M, Itagaki S, et al.
Plasma levels of dopamine metabolite correlate with mismatch negativity in
patients with schizophrenia. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (2020) 74(5):289 –93.
doi: 10.1111/pcn.12984
123. Kaur M, Battisti RA, Lagopoulos J, Ward PB, Hickie IB, Hermens DF.
Neurophysiological biomarkers support bipolar-spectrum disorders within
psychosis cluster. J Psychiatry Neurosci (2012) 37(5):313 –21. doi: 10.1503/
jpn.110081
124. Koshiyama D, Fukunaga M, Okada N, Yamashita F, Yamamori H, Yasuda Y,
et al. Role of subcortical structures on cognitive and social function in
schizophrenia. Sci Rep (2018) 8(1):1183. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-18950-2
125. Fujioka M, Kirihara K, Koshiyama D, Tada M, Nagai T, Usui K, et al.
Mismatch Negativity Predicts Remission and Neurocognitive Function in
Individuals at Ultra-High Risk for Psychosis. Front Psychiatry (2020) 11:770.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00770
126. Kim M, Lee TH, Yoon YB, Lee TY, Kwon JS. Predicting remission in subjects
at clinical high risk for psychosis using mismatch negativity. Schizophr Bull
(2018) 44(3):575 –83. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx102
127. Thomas ML, Green MF, Hellemann G, Sugar CA, Tarasenko M, Calkins ME,
et al. Modeling de ﬁcits from early auditory information processing to
psychosocial functioning in schizophrenia. JAMA Psychiatry
(2017) 74
(1):37–46. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.2980
128. Atkinson RJ, Michie PT, Schall U. Duration mismatch negativity and P3a in
ﬁrst-episode psychosis and individuals at ultra-high risk of psychosis. Biol
Psychiatry (2012) 71(2):98 –104. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.08.023
129. Jahshan C, Wynn JK, Mathis KI, Altshuler LL, Glahn DC, Green MF. Cross-
diagnostic comparison of duration mismatch negativity and P3a in bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia. Bipolar Disord (2012) 14(3):239 –48. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5618.2012.01008.x
1 3 0 .B o d a t s c hM ,R u h r m a n nS ,W a g n e rM ,M ü l l e rR ,S c h u l t z e - L u t t e rF ,
Frommann I, et al. Prediction of psychosis by mismatch negativity. Biol
Psychiatry (2011) 69(10):959 –66. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.09.057
131. Brockhaus-Dumke A, Tendolkar I, Pukrop R, Schu ltze-Lutter F,
Klosterkötter J, Ruhrmann S. Impaired mismatch negativity generation in
prodromal subjects and patients with schizophrenia. Schizophr Res (2005) 73
(2-3):297–310. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2004.05.016
132. Javitt DC, Shelley A, Ritter W. Associated de ﬁcits in mismatch negativity
generation and tone matching in schizophrenia. Clin Neurophysiol (2000)
111(10):1733–7. doi: 10.1016/S1388-2457(00)00377-1
133. Salisbury DF, Shenton ME, Griggs CB, Bonner-Jackson A, McCarley RW.
Mismatch negativity in ch ronic schizophrenia and ﬁrst-episode
schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry (2002) 59(8):686 –94. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.59.8.686
134. Umbricht DS, Bates JA, Lieberman JA, Kane JM, Javitt DC.
Electrophysiological indices of automatic and controlled auditory
information processing in ﬁrst-episode, recent-onset and chronic
schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry (2006) 59(8):762 –72. doi: 10.1016/
j.biopsych.2005.08.030
135. Murphy JR, Rawdon C, Kelleher I, Twomey D, Markey PS, Cannon M, et al.
Reduced duration mismatch negativ ity in adolescents with psychotic
symptoms: further evidence for mismatch negativity as a possible
biomarker for vulnerability to psychosis. BMC Psychiatry (2013) 13(1):45.
doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-13-45
136. Perez VB, Woods SW, Roach BJ, Ford JM, McGlashan TH, Srihari VH, et al.
Automatic auditory processing de ﬁcits in schizophrenia and clinical high-
risk patients: forecasting psychosis risk with mismatch negativity. Biol
Psychiatry (2014) 75(6):459 –69. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.07.038
137. Devrim-Uc ̧ok M, Keskin-Ergen HY, Uc ̧ok A. Mismatch negativity at acute
and post-acute phases of ﬁrst-episode schizophrenia. Eur Arch Psychiatry
Clin Neurosci (2008) 258(3):179 –85. doi: 10.1007/s00406-007-0772-9
138. Salisbury DF, Kuroki N, Kasai K, Shenton ME, McCarley RW. Progressive
and interrelated functional and structural evidence of post-onset brain
reduction in schizophrenia. Arch Gen Psychiatry (2007) 64(5):521
–9. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.64.5.521
139. Shinozaki N, Yabe H, Sato Y, Hiruma T, Sutoh T, Nashida T, et al. The
difference in Mismatch negativity between the acute and post-acute phase of
schizophrenia. Biol Psychol (2002) 59(2):105 –19. doi: 10.1016/S0301-0511
(01)00129-6
140. Kaur M, Lagopoulos J, Lee RS, Ward PB, Naismith SL, Hickie IB, et al.
Longitudinal associations between mismatch negativity and disability in early
schizophrenia-and affective-spectrum disorders.Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol
Psychiatry(2013) 46:161–9. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.07.002
141. Light GA, Braff DL. Mismatch negativity de ﬁcits are associated with poor
functioning in schizophrenia patients. Arch Gen Psychiatry (2005) 62
(2):127–36. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.2.127
142. Umbricht D, Koller R, Schmid L, Skrabo A, Grübel C, Huber T, et al. How
speciﬁc are deﬁcits in mismatch negativity generation to schizophrenia? Biol
Psychiatry (2003) 53(12):1120 –31. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01642-6
143. Hermens DF, Chitty KM, Kaur M. Mismatch negativity in bipolar disorder:
A neurophysiological biomarker of intermediate effect? Schizophr Res (2018)
191:132–9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2017.04.026
144. Jahshan C, Cadenhead KS, Rissling AJ, Kirihara K, Braff DL, Light GA.
Automatic sensory information processing abnormalities across the illness
course of schizophrenia. Psychol Med (2012) 42(1):85 –97. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291711001061
145. Andersson S, Barder HE, Hellvin T, Løvdahl H, Malt UF. Neuropsychological
and electrophysiological indices of neu rocognitive dysfunction in bipolar II
disorder. Bipolar Disord (2008) 10(8):888 –99. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-
5618.2008.00638.x
146. Hirakawa N, Hirano Y, Nakamura I, Hirano S, Sato J, Oribe N, et al. Right
hemisphere pitch-mismatch negativity reduction in patients with major
depression: an MEG study. J Affect Disord (2017) 215:225 –9. doi: 10.1016/
j.jad.2017.03.046
147. Qiao Z, Yu Y, Wang L, Yang X, Qiu X, Zhang C, et al. Impaired pre-attentive
change detection in major depressive disorder patients revealed by auditory
mismatch negativity. Psychiatry Res (2013) 211(1):78 –84. doi: 10.1016/
j.pscychresns.2012.07.006
148. Chen J, Zhang Y, Wei D, Wu X, Fu Q, Xu F, et al. Neurophysiological
handover from MMN to P3a in ﬁrst-episode and recurrent major depression.
J Affect Disord (2015) 174:173 –9. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2014.11.049
149. Kim S, Jeon H, Jang KI, Kim YW, Im CH, Lee SH. Mismatch negativity and
cortical thickness in patients with schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Schizophr Bull (2019) 45(2):425 –35. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sby041
150. Corlett PR, Horga G, Fletcher PC, Alderson-Day B, Schmack K. Powers AR
3rd. Hallucinations and strong priors. Trends Cognit Sci (2019) 23(2):114 –
27. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2018.12.001
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 55793213
151. Powers AR, Mathys C, Corlett PR. Pavlovian conditioning-induced
hallucinations result from over weighting of perceptual priors. Science
(2017) 357(6351):596 –600. doi: 10.1126/science.aan3458
152. Dima D, Roiser JP, Dietrich DE, Bonnemann C, Lanfermann H, Emrich HM,
et al. Understanding why patients with schizophrenia do not perceive the
hollow-mask illusion using dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage (2009) 46
(4):1180–6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.03.033
153. Dima D, Dietrich DE, Dillo W, Emrich HM. Impaired top-down processes in
schizophrenia: a DCM study of ERPs. Neuroimage (2010) 52(3):824–32. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.086
154. Sauer A, Zeev-Wolf M, Grent- ’t-Jong T, Recasens M, Wacongne C, Wibral M,
et al. Impairment in predictive processes during auditory mismatch negativity
in ScZ: Evidence from event-related ﬁelds. Hum Brain Mapping (2017) 38
(10):5082–93. doi: 10.1002/hbm.23716
155. McCleery A, Wynn JK, Mathalon DH, Roach BJ, Green MF. Hallucinations,
neuroplasticity, and prediction errors in schizophrenia. Scand J Psychol
(2018) 59(1):41 –8. doi: 10.1111/sjop.12413
156. Coffman BA, Haigh SM, Murphy TK, Salisbury DF. Impairment in
mismatch negativity but not repeti tion suppression in schizophrenia.
Brain Topogr (2017) 30(4):521 –30. doi: 10.1007/s10548-017-0571-1
157. Koshiyama D, Kirihara K, Tada M, Nagai T, Fujioka M, Usui K, et al. Reduced
auditory mismatch negativity re ﬂects impaired deviance detection in
schizophrenia.Schizophr Bull(2020) 46(4):937–46. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbaa006
158. Kasai K, Shenton ME, Salisbury DF, Hirayasu Y, Lee CU, Ciszewski AA, et al.
Progressive decrease of left superior temporal gyrus gray matter volume in
patients with ﬁrst-episode schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry (2003) 160
(1):156–64. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.1.156
159. Grimm S, Escera C. Auditory deviance detection revisited: evidence for a
hierarchical novelty system. Int J Psychophysiol (2012) 85(1):88 –92. doi:
10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2011.05.012
160. Grimm S, Escera C, Nelken I. Early indices of deviance detection in humans
and animal models. Biol Psychol (2016) 116:23 –7. doi: 10.1016/
j.biopsycho.2015.11.017
161. Harms L, Fulham WR, Todd J, Meehan C, Schall U, Hodgson DM, et al. Late
deviance detection in rats is reduced, while early deviance detection is
augmented by the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801. Schizophr Res
(2018) 191:43 –50. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2017.03.042
162. Umbricht D, Koller R, Vollenweider FX, Schmid L. Mismatch negativity
predicts psychotic experiences induced by NMDA receptor antagonist in
healthy volunteers. Biol Psychiatry (2002) 51(5):400 –6. doi: 10.1016/S0006-
3223(01)01242-2
163. Uhrig L, Janssen D, Dehaene S, Jarraya B. Cerebral responses to local and
global auditory novelty u nder general anesthesia. Neuroimage (2016)
141:326–40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.004
164. Coyle JT, Tsai G, Goff D. Converging evidence of NMDA receptor
hypofunction in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Ann N Y Acad Sci
(2003) 1003(1):318 –27. doi: 10.1196/annals.1300.020
165. Kristiansen LV, Huerta I, Beneyto M, Meador-Woodruff JH. NMDA
receptors and schizophrenia. Curr Opin Pharmacol (2007) 7(1):48 –55. doi:
10.1016/j.coph.2006.08.013
166. Kort NS, Ford JM, Roach BJ, Gunduz-Bruce H, Krystal JH, Jaeger J, et al.
Role of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors in action-based predictive coding
deﬁcits in schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry (2017) 81(6):514–24. doi: 10.1016/
j.biopsych.2016.06.019
167. Mohn AR, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG, Koller BH. Mice with reduced
NMDA receptor expression display behaviors related to schizophrenia. Cell
(1999) 98(4):427 –36. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81972-8
168. Olney JW, Newcomer JW, Farber NB. NMDA receptor hypofunction model
of schizophrenia. J Psychiatr Res (1999) 33(6):523 –33. doi: 10.1016/S0022-
3956(99)00029-1
169. Horga G, Schatz KC, Abi-Dargham A, Peterson BS. De ﬁcits in predictive
coding underlie hallucinations in schizophrenia. JN e u r o s c i(2014) 34
(24):8072–82. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0200-14.2014
170. Tobler PN, Fiorillo CD, Schultz W. Adaptive coding of reward value by
dopamine neurons. Science (2005) 307(5715):1642 –5. doi: 10.1126/
science.1105370
171. Gold JM, Waltz JA, Prentice KJ, Morris SE, Heerey EA. Reward processing in
schizophrenia: a de ﬁcit in the representation of value. Schizophr Bull (2008)
34(5):835–47. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn068
172. McCutcheon RA, Krystal JH, Howes OD. Dopamine and glutamate in
schizophrenia: biology, symptoms and treatment. World Psychiatry (2020)
19(1):15–33. doi: 10.1002/wps.20693
173. Schultz W. Dopamine reward prediction-error signalling: a two-component
response. Nat Rev Neurosci (2016) 17(3):183 –95. doi: 10.1038/nrn.
2015.26
174. Yagishita D, Chui RW, Yamakawa K, Rajendran PS, Ajijola OA, Nakamura
K, et al. Sympathetic nerve stimulation, not circulating norepinephrine,
modulates T-peak to T-end interval by increasing global dispersion of
repolarization. Circulat: Arrhythmia Electrophysiol (2015) 8(1):174 –85. doi:
10.1161/CIRCEP.114.002195
175. Kravitz AV, Tye LD, Kreitzer AC. Distinct roles for direct and indirect
pathway striatal neurons in reinforcement. Nat Neurosci (2012) 15(6):816–8.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3100
176. Yagishita S. Transient and sustained effects of dopamine and serotonin
signaling in motivation-related behavior. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci (2020) 74
(2):91–8. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12942
177. Iino Y, Sawada T, Yamaguchi K, Tajiri M, Ishii S, Kasai H, et al. Dopamine
D2 receptors in discrimination learning and spine enlargement.
Nature
(2020) 579(7800):555 –60. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2115-1
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential con ﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Fong, Law, Uka and Koike. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No
use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Fong et al. Mismatch Negativity Under Predictive Coding
Frontiers in Psychiatry | www.frontiersin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 55793214
