# Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595

**Year:** D:20

---

1 3
Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
DOI 10.1007/s00221-015-4233-9

## RESEARCH ARTICLE

(Dis‑)Harmony in movement: effects of musical dissonance
on movement timing and form
Naeem Komeilipoor · Matthew W. M. Rodger ·
Cathy M. Craig · Paola Cesari
Received: 14 October 2014 / Accepted: 14 February 2015 / Published online: 1 March 2015
© The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Introduction
We interact with our environment through movement;
with the way we move being influenced by many different
types of perceptual information. For instance, environmen-
tal sounds carry an ecological significance that allows us
to move in the direction of an object, detect the presence
of objects, interact with others and even interpret events
using sound alone (Gaver 1993; Carello et al. 2005). One
of the key ways in which humans naturally interact with
their auditory environment is when they synchronize their
movements to regular patterns of sound (e.g., dancing to
a beat). Indeed, to be able to synchronize movements to
sounds, an activity humans are very skilled at, the nerv-
ous system must pick up information from the auditory
perceptual stream about the time until the next beat sounds
and use this information to prospectively guide the genera-
tion of consecutive actions (Craig et al. 2005). Given the
absence of a continuous source of external temporal infor-
mation to guide the action extrinsically, the nervous system
must create its own source of dynamic temporal informa-
tion (Tau-G, Craig et al. 2005). It has already been shown
that the structure of sound events (discrete vs. continuous)
can affect the processes by which movements are timed to
sounds, even if the interval durations are the same (Rodger
and Craig 2011, 2013). Although synchronization of body
movement to the perceived musical tempo has been widely
studied (see Repp and Su 2013, for a review), the effects
of other aspects of auditory stimuli on movement–sound
synchronization, such as musical pitch relationships, have
largely been neglected. Synchronizing movements with musical rhythms is
indeed one of the most natural and instinctive ways in which
humans interact with their auditory environment. The inex-
tricable link between sound and movement forms the basis
Abstract  While the origins of consonance and dissonance
in terms of acoustics, psychoacoustics and physiology have
been debated for centuries, their plausible effects on move-
ment synchronization have largely been ignored. The pre-
sent study aimed to address this by investigating whether,
and if so how, consonant/dissonant pitch intervals affect
the spatiotemporal properties of regular reciprocal aiming
movements. We compared movements synchronized either
to consonant or to dissonant sounds and showed that they
were differentially influenced by the degree of consonance
of the sound presented. Interestingly, the difference was
present after the sound stimulus was removed. In this case,
the performance measured after consonant sound exposure
was found to be more stable and accurate, with a higher
percentage of information/movement coupling (tau cou-
pling) and a higher degree of movement circularity when
compared to performance measured after the exposure to
dissonant sounds. We infer that the neural resonance rep-
resenting consonant tones leads to finer perception/action
coupling which in turn may help explain the prevailing
preference for these types of tones. Keywords  Consonance dissonance sounds · Musical
pitch intervals · Sensorimotor synchronization
N. Komeilipoor (*) · P. Cesari
Department of Neurological and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, Via Casorati 43, 37131 Verona, Italy
e-mail: naeem.komeilipoor@univr.it
N. Komeilipoor
MOVE Research Institute, VU University Amsterdam,

### 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands

M. W. M. Rodger · C. M. Craig
School of Psychology, Queen’s University Belfast, David Keir
Building, 18‑30 Malone Road, Belfast BT9 5BN, UK

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
of music and dance performance. Interestingly, it has been
shown that music and movements share similar structures
and present common cross-cultural expressive codes (Siev-
ers et al. 2013). In the same vein, the evaluation of the emo-
tional content of observed biological motion (point-light
displays of human motion) has been shown to be strongly
influenced by the presence of accompanying music (Kai-
ser and Keller 2011). Already from the first month of life,
infants move their body more naturally under the pres-
ence of musical rhythm than speech rhythm (Zentner and
Eerola 2010), being able not only to synchronize correctly
their movements with the different musical tempo but also
being selectively sensitive to melodies presenting differ-
ent pitch structures (Zentner and Kagan 1998). In a differ-
ent scenario, human adults have been shown to use a dif-
ferent walking strategy under the guidance of music than
under a metronome beat (Styns et al. 2007; Wittwer et al.
2013). A number of studies have revealed that musical
rhythm can even enhance motor performance in Parkinson’s
disease (PD) (Thaut and Abiru 2010; Satoh and Kuzuhara
2008; Lim et  al. 2005). Moreover, using a finger-tapping
paradigm, it has been shown that synchronization error was
significantly less when tapping with music cues than metro-
nome ones (Thaut 1997). What emerges from these studies
is that in addition to the timing cues music conveys, other
properties also help guide the coordination of movement. Hence, investigating whether and how non-temporal cues,
such as pitch and harmony, influence movement synchroni-
zation is crucial for understanding the inseparable connec-
tion between action and perception. Consonant and dissonant pitch relationships in music
provide the basis of melody and harmony. It has been rec-
ognized since antiquity that musical chords are either con-
sonant (sounding pleasant or stable) or dissonant (sound-
ing unpleasant or instable). Although composers make use
of both intervals to evoke diverse feelings of “tension” and
“resolution,” consonant intervals in tonal music occur more
often than the dissonant ones (Vos and Troost 1989). Con-
sonant intervals are more preferred also by human infants
(Trainor et  al. 2002; Zentner and Kagan 1998; Masataka
2006). Remarkably, the preference of consonance over dis-
sonance seems to be cross-cultural, as it has been reported
among native African populations who did not have prior
experience with Western music (Fritz et al. 2009). Moreo-
ver, Schwartz et  al. (2003) found a correlation between
musical consonance rankings and the probability distribu-
tion of amplitude–frequency of human utterances, suggest-
ing that the preference for musical pitch intervals is based
on similar physical principals that rule human vocalization
(Schwartz et  al. 2003). Overall, it seems that some char-
acteristics of musical pitch interval perception might be
innate and represent a by-product of fundamental biologi-
cal properties. While we can identify differences in the preference and
occurrence of consonant and dissonant pitch intervals in
nature, it is also possible to define these differences at a
mathematical or physical level. The Greek scholar Pythago-
ras defined the occurrence of consonance as being when the
length of string segments forms simple integer ratios (e.g.,
3:2, 2:1) with dissonant intervals being when string length
ratios are more complex (e.g., 16:15, 243:128). Hermann
von Helmholtz argued that consonance occurs not only
as a consequence of simple frequency ratio relationships,
but also as a result of the interference between overtones
of slightly different frequencies—a phenomenon known as
beating. When the harmonics of complex tones are close,
the beating gets faster and forms an unpleasant sensation
called roughness (Helmholtz 1954)
A number of studies have attempted to investigate the
neuronal substrates underlying the perception of conso-
nance and dissonance. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) has revealed differences in activation in
different brain areas such as the cingulate and frontal gyrus,
and the premotor cortex while listening to dissonant over
consonant chords (Tillmann et al. 2003; Foss et al. 2007; Minati et al. 2009). A recent EEG study provided evidence
that consonance and dissonance activate neural regions
associated with pleasant and unpleasant emotional states,
respectively (Maslennikova et al. 2013). Other studies have
investigated the neural correlates of emotional responses
to consonant (pleasant) and dissonant (unpleasant) music
(for review, see Koelsch et al. 2006; Sammler et al. 2007). Studies of event-related potentials (ERPs) revealed that
such modulations in cortical activity were correlated with
the hierarchical ordering of musical pitch (i.e., the degree
of consonance or dissonance of different tone combinations
in a musical scale) (Brattico et al. 2006; Krohn et al. 2007; Itoh et al. 2010). In a recent study, Bidelman and Krishnan
(2009) showed that consonant intervals yield more robust
and synchronous phase locking of auditory brainstem
responses, that is, the mechanism by which the auditory
nerves fire at or near the same phase angle of a sound wave. Importantly, this result is in accord with pervious animal
studies revealing a correlation between the perceived con-
sonance of musical pitch relationships and the magnitude of
phase-locked activity in the primary auditory cortex (Fish-
man et al. 2001), the auditory nerve (Tramo et al. 2001) and
the midbrain (Mckinney et al. 2001). Together, these stud-
ies suggest compelling evidence that musical scale pitch
hierarchies are preserved at both cortical and subcortical
levels, which indicates that the auditory system is tuned in
to the biological relevance of consonant versus dissonant
sounds. Importantly, Tierney and Kraus (2013) demon-
strated that the ability to synchronize to a beat relates to
the phase-locking response in the auditory brainstem; less
auditory–motor synchronization variability when tapping

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
to a beat is associated with more consistent responses in the
auditory brainstem. Hence, a more stable neural representa-
tion of consonant intervals compared with dissonant ones
could lead to a more stable motor output even during the
continuation phase where no external pacing stimulus is
present. The latter might happen due to different emotional
states evoked by sounds during the synchronization phase,
which might last during the continuation phase and in turn
affect the types of movements produced. Given the suggested ecological relevance of conso-
nance/dissonance, it is possible that the harmonic structure
of sounds may affect the spatiotemporal characteristics of
movements when using such sounds to guide timed actions. Our study addresses this issue in a synchronization–contin-
uation paradigm, in which participants were asked to syn-
chronize their movements with auditory tones and then to
maintain the same pattern of movements in the absence of
the auditory stimuli. The pair of tones delivered differed in
the degree of dissonance (from highly consonant (C & G)
to highly dissonant (C & C#). By measuring timing accu-
racy and variability, along with parameters defining the
movement trajectory form, we assessed the effects of audi-
tory consonance/dissonance on participants’ movements. Finally, we tested the effects of sound on movement by
applying a model derived from tau-coupling theory (Craig
et al. 2005), which describes how the prospective tempo-
ral information generated within the central nervous system
(an intrinsic tau-guide) can facilitate the prospective con-
trol of movement for synchronizing movement to beats. The intrinsic tau-guide is developed based on general tau
theory (Lee 1998), which aims to describe the control of
intrinsically paced movements. In terms of sensorimo-
tor synchronization, Craig et  al. (2005) postulated that
during the synchronization of movement with beats the
inter-onset intervals are represented in the form of a “tau-
guide,” a dynamic neural representation that prospectively
informs individuals about the time remaining to the arrival
of the next beat. They reported that individuals accomplish
the task by coupling their movement onto the tau-guide
where the tau of the movement gap (τm—the movement
gap divided by its closure rate) is kept in constant ratio to
the tau-guide (τg—the time-to-sounding of the next beat). Hence, the acoustic information of a metronome’s beat sets
the parameters of the intrinsic tau-guide in the nervous sys-
tem that consequently guides the spatiotemporal unfolding
of the synchronization movement. What is not clear yet is
whether the structure of an auditory event can differentially
affect the tau-coupling procedure and consequently result
in different movement timing processes. Our overall aim was to test whether and how consonant/
dissonant pitch intervals affect the spatiotemporal proper-
ties of regular reciprocal aiming movements. We hypoth-
esized that (1) both the spatial and temporal dynamics of
coordinated movement would differ when synchronizing
movement to consonant compared with dissonant tones and
(2) such differences in movement will be maintained when
the stimuli are removed. Methods
Participants
Thirteen healthy (7 females and 6 males), right-handed
adults with no musical training (assessed via a question-
naire) volunteered to participate in the experiment. The
mean age was 29.4 years (range 20–38 years). Materials and apparatus
A set of four synthesized piano musical dyads (i.e., two-
note musical intervals) were constructed as stimuli and pre-
sented to participants through noise-isolating headphones
at a constant intensity (68 dB SPL). The stimuli consisted
of two consonant intervals (perfect fourth: 4:3, perfect
fifth: 3:2) and two dissonant intervals (minor second:
16:15, major seventh: 15:8) played back in an isochronous
sequence where the inter-onset interval was 0.6 s. Sounds
were played for the same duration (0.6 s) with a decreas-
ing amplitude envelope (see Fig. 1b). Sounds were created
with Guitar Pro 6 software (www.guitar-pro.com/) (music
notation, waveform, frequency spectra and spectrogram for
each sound can be seen in Fig. 1). The stimuli were deliv-
ered using a Pure Data (http://puredata.info/) patch. Participants were asked to sit in front of the table so that
the sagittal plane line of their right arm bisected the hori-
zontal plane midway between the two targets. The experi-
mental setup is shown in Fig. 2. Targets were printed on
laminated A4 paper. The targets were two 5  ×  21  cm
black-colored blocks, separated by a white gap of 20 cm. Participants wore a thimble on their right index finger with
a mounted reflective marker. Motion data were recorded
using 3 Qualisys Oqus 300 Motion Capture cameras con-
nected to a Dell PC running QTM software, sampling at

### 500  Hz with a spatial accuracy of ±0.1  mm. Before the

start of each trial, the coordinates of the target zones were
recorded so that the positional data could be calibrated with
respect to target position. Motion capture data were syn-
chronized with the sounds presented using the Open Sound
Control (http://opensoundcontrol.org/) protocol. Procedure
For all trials, participants were given specific instruction to
slide their right index fingers between the two target zones
in such a way that the stopping of movement in the target

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
zone coincided with the sounding of the metronome beats
(synchronization phase). Hence, both the beginning and the
end of each movement were defined as the moment when
the hand stopped in the target zones. They were also asked
to continue moving between the target zones after the met-
ronome had stopped sounding, maintaining the same interval
duration between each movement (the continuation phase),
until they were instructed to stop moving by the experimenter
(see Fig.  2). At the start of each block, participants were
presented with 10 repetitions of each sound type so that they
could become familiar with the interval duration. Each par-
ticipant took part in a single session comprised of five blocks
of four conditions (four sounds: perfect fifth, perfect fourth,
major seventh and minor second). For each condition, in both
the synchronization and the continuation phases, 30 intercep-
tive movements to the targets were recorded (15 to the left
side and 15 to the right side). The presentation of the experi-
mental conditions was counterbalanced across participants. After the synchronization part of the experiment was
completed, behavioral valence judgments of consonance
and dissonance sounds (pleasantness/unpleasantness) were
measured using a rating scale paradigm. The four stimuli
used in the experiment (perfect fourth, perfect fifth, major
seventh and minor second) were presented to each partici-
pant at an intensity of 68 dB through headphones for 4 s. After the presentation of each sound, individuals were
asked to rate the valence/pleasantness of each stimulus on
a 5-point rating scales where “1” indicated very unpleasant
and “5” indicated very pleasant. Data analysis
Temporal control of movement was analyzed by examin-
ing both the timing and movement trajectory formation
Fig. 1   a Musical notation. b Waveform. c Frequency spectra. d Spectrograms for the four chords (two consonant and two dissonant) used in the
study
Fig. 2   Illustration of the experimental setup where the two black rec‑
tangles represent the target zones. The duration of the inter-stimulus
interval is represented as the temporal gap on the diagram

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
(absolute synchronization errors, spread of error, movement
harmonicity and tau-guide coupling). Using MATLAB,
positional data were filtered using an eight-order low-pass
Butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 20  Hz (The
Mathworks Inc. 2011). The velocity profile was calculated
using the first derivative of the smoothed positional data. Synchronization was determined as being the point when
the finger stopped moving. The moment representing the
end of the finger movement was taken as the first sample
that dropped below 5 % of peak velocity for that particular
interceptive movement to the target zone. Descriptions of
the calculations for each measure are given below. Absolute synchronization errors
Absolute synchronization errors between a participant’s
finger movements and the auditory guides were measured
for each movement as an absolute difference between the
time of auditory stimulus onset and the time when the fin-
ger stopped in the target zone. The beats sounded for the
same duration as the inter-stimulus interval (0.6  s) with
a decreasing amplitude envelope. Synchronization was
assumed to be possible, as the beats (chords) had a clear
amplitude onset, which has been shown in previous stud-
ies to perceptually demarcate the beginning of an auditory
event (Phillips et al. 2002). Spread of error
The variability of the synchronization error between con-
secutive movements for each trial was measured using the
spread of error calculation described by Bien´kiewicz et al.
(2012). It was measured as the absolute difference between
the synchronization errors (with respect to beat onset) made
in consecutive movements.
where SpE is average spread error, T is temporal error (the
difference in time between the onset of the auditory stimu-
lus and the moment the finger stopped in the target zone)
and N is the overall number of trials. Movement harmonicity
The harmonicity of the movement (a measure of how sinu-
soidal the dynamics of individual movements are) was cal-
culated by the formula used in Rodger and Craig (2011). This was calculated by normalizing the absolute velocity
profile for each movement so that it fell between 0 and 1
and then interpolating to give 101 data points. The index
of circularity was measured by calculating the root mean
(1)
SpE =
N
i=1 |Ti+1 −Ti|

## N −1

square error (RMSE) between the normalized velocity–dis-
placement profile and a semicircle, and it was subtracted
from 1 (1-RMSE). A semicircle consists of 101 points
given by
Tau‑guide coupling
Finally, we tested a model derived from tau-coupling the-
ory (Craig et al. 2005). According to this theory, in order
to synchronize movements with auditory beats, one would
need to couple the temporal control of movement, or tau
of the motion gap x, (τX(t)) onto an internal tau-guide that
specifies the time-to-sounding of the next beat (τg(t)) at a
constant ratio (k) so that
The time to closure of a motion gap, tau x (τX(t)), speci-
fies the way the movement changes over time and is defined
as the ratio between the magnitude of the action displace-
ment gap and its current rate of closure: X (displacement)/X˙
(velocity). The intrinsic tau-guide, τg(t), is derived from
Newton’s equations of motion and represents the time
to gap closure of a virtual object moving under constant
acceleration (Lee 1998),
with T being equal to the inter-beat interval (0.6 s) and t
the evolving time series within the inter-beat interval. The
value k is the coupling constant that captures the dynam-
ics of gap closure with different k values corresponding
to different velocity profiles (Craig et al. 2005). In order
to find the strength of coupling, the tau of the movement
was linearly regressed against the hypothetical tau-G
guide and the strength of the coupling was calculated
by the r-squared values of the regression analysis, with
higher r-squared values indicating a stronger coupling
(see Fig. 3). Statistical analysis
Kinematic data
Two-way repeated-measure ANOVAs [2 sounds (consonant
and dissonant) × 2 task phase (synchronization and contin‑
uation)] were carried out on each of the five different vari-
ables. Post hoc comparisons were performed by means of t
tests applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple compar-
isons when required. A partial eta-squared statistic served
as the effect size estimate.
f (x) = 2 × √(x × (1 −x)),
where x = {0, 0.01, 0.02,..., 1}
(2)
τX(t) = kτg(t)
(3)
τg(t) = 1
2 ×
t −T2
t

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
Behavioral data
A paired sample t test was used to examine the difference
between the mean rating of pleasantness for consonant and
dissonant sounds. A Cohen’s d statistic was also used as an
effect size estimate. Results
Behavioral valence ratings of consonance and dissonance
The average behavioral valence ratings for pleasantness
for the four stimuli were found to be higher for the con-
sonant (4.30 ± 0.23 for perfect fifth, 3.61 ± 0.26 for per-
fect fourth) compared with dissonant sounds (2.69 ± 0.22
for major seventh and 1.92 ± 0.22 for minor second). This
ordering of consonance observed here is consistent with
previous reports of pleasantness ratings of musical intervals
(e.g., Bidelman and Krishnan 2009, 2011; Bidelman and
Heinz 2011; Schwartz et al. 2003). A paired t test showed
that this difference in perceived pleasantness between the
consonant sounds and dissonant sounds was significant
(t(12) = 5.133, p < 0.001, Cohen’s d = 22.09). Kinematic data
Absolute Synchronization Error
We found a significant main effect for sounds (F1, 12
= 23.397, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.661) with the absolute syn-
chronization errors for dissonant sounds being significantly
larger when compared to consonant sounds. This indicates
that performance at matching the specified timing was
superior for the consonant compared with the dissonant
metronome. Moreover, we found a significant main effect
for task phase (F1, 12 = 6.037, p = 0.03, η2 = 0.335), where
again the absolute synchronization errors were significantly
larger for the continuation compared with synchroniza-
tion movements. The interaction between sounds and task
phase was also significant (F1, 12  =  15.716, p  =  0.002,
η2  =  0.567). The t test revealed that for the dissonant
sounds the absolute synchronization errors were greater
during the continuation conditions compared with the syn-
chronization conditions (p = 0.007) with errors in the con-
tinuation dissonant condition being greater than the conso-
nant one (p < 0.001) (see Fig. 4). Spread of error
An analysis of the spread of errors showed a signifi-
cant main effect for sounds (F1, 12  =  43.441, p  <  0.001,
η2  =  0.784). The timing variability, as measured by the
spread of errors, was significantly greater for dissonant
compared with consonant sounds. A significant main effect
of task phase was also found (F1, 12 = 10.503, p = 0.007,
η2  =  0.467) where the spread of error was significantly
larger for continuation compared with synchronization
phases. The interaction between sounds and task phase was also
significant (F1, 12 = 85.452, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.877). The
t test revealed that for consonant and also dissonant inter-
vals the spread of error was significantly larger during the
continuation compared with the synchronization conditions
Fig. 3   Examples of tau coupling between the tau of the movement
gap and the intrinsic tau-guide. The R2 values displayed in the top left
corner are the linear regression coefficients and k values are the cou-
pling constants
Fig. 4   Absolute synchronization error means averaged across all 13
participants for both sound conditions (consonant and dissonant) in
the two different stimuli presentation conditions (synchronization and
continuation). Error bars denote standard errors. Significant compari-
sons between conditions are highlighted using an asterisk (*p < 0.05)

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
(p < 0.001). During the continuation movements, the spread
of error was significantly greater for dissonant compared
with consonant sounds (p < 0.001) (see Fig. 5). Circularity index
To understand whether the synchronization movements with
consonant and dissonant intervals gave rise to different move-
ment trajectory forms, we carried out an analysis on move-
ment harmonicity. Movement harmonicity can be quantified
through a circularity index, which is the RMSE between the
normalized velocity profile and the perfect harmonic (sinusoi-
dal) motion (semicircle with blue dots in Fig. 7b) and then
subtracted from one. Therefore, a perfect circular motion
yields a circularity index of one. Discrepancies in the degree
of harmonicity for different conditions (consonant/dissonant)
would reveal that the dynamics underlying the movement are
influenced by the structure of the sound stimuli. The results revealed a significant main effect for sound
(F1, 12 = 9.419, p = 0.01, η2 = 0.44). Furthermore, it was
noted that the dynamics of the movements to consonant
sounds were significantly more harmonic (larger circular-
ity index) than movements to dissonant sounds. The main
effect of task phase was also significant (F1, 12  =  5.433,
p = 0.038, η2 = 0.312) with movements being found to be
more circular during the synchronization compared with
the continuation phases. The interaction between sounds
and task phase was also found to be significant (F1, 12
= 10.392, p = 0.007, η2 = 0.464). The t test revealed that
for the dissonant intervals the harmonicity of movement
was significantly greater (larger circularity index) during
the synchronization compared with the continuation phases
(p = 0.015). Moreover, when moving in the continuation
phase to the memory of the metronome, the harmonic-
ity of movements was found to be greater (the circularity
index was larger) with consonant compared with dissonant
sounds (p = 0.008) (see Figs. 6, 7). Tau‑G coupling
To understand how the type of information presented
through the stimuli might be affecting the subsequent move-
ment, we carried out an information–movement analysis
using the tau-coupling model. The intrinsic tau-guide is a
mathematical description of how the time to the next beat
could be represented by neural structures (Craig et al. 2005). The form of the guide is prospective in nature allowing for
the regulation of action. This part of the analysis allows us
to see whether the type of information presented (conso-
nant/dissonant) affects the neural representation of the time
between beats and the subsequent resonance of that interval. To test this, we examined the extent of the coupling
between the movement and the information (the intrinsic
tau-guide) (see Fig. 3). We measured the strength of cou-
pling (r-squared values) when the tau of the movement was
plotted against the intrinsic tau-guide (the neural informa-
tion specifying the time to the next beat). R2 values from
the tau-coupling regression analysis were calculated for
each movement and then averaged for each condition and
participant. A significant main effect for sound was found
(F1, 12 = 7.666, p= 0.017, η2 = 0.39) with the r-squared
values for the tau coupling being significantly greater for
the consonant sounds compared with the dissonant sounds. In addition, we found a significant main effect for task
Fig. 5   Spread of error averaged across all 13 participants for both
consonant and dissonant conditions in the two different stimuli pres-
entation conditions (synchronization and continuation). Error bars
denote standard errors. Significant comparisons between conditions
are highlighted with an asterisk (*p < 0.05)
Fig. 6   Circularity index averaged across all 13 participants for both
consonant and dissonant conditions in the two different stimuli pres-
entation conditions (synchronization and continuation). Error bars
denote standard errors. Significant comparisons between conditions
are highlighted with an asterisk (*p < 0.05)

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
phase (F1, 12 = 8.151, p = 0.014, η2 = 0.404) with tau-cou-
pling r-squared values being significantly higher during the
synchronization compared with the continuation phases. Moreover, the interaction between sounds and task phase
was also significant (F1, 12 = 9.151, p = 0.011, η2 = 0.433). The t test revealed that for the dissonant intervals the
degree of tau-G coupling was significantly stronger during
the synchronization condition as compared to the continu-
ation phase (p = 0.005). Moreover, during the continuation
phase, the extent of the coupling between the movements
and the guide was significantly greater for consonant com-
pared with dissonant sounds (p = 0.013) (see Fig. 8). Discussion1
In this study, we showed that the degree of consonance
of the sound presented influenced the types of movement
produced after the sound stimulus was removed and the

### 1  Please note that the significant main effects found in the above sta-

tistics are not meaningful in light of the significant interactions. For
example, while the main effect of sound (consonant and dissonant)
and task phase (synchronization and continuation) were found to be
significant, the interactions between them indicate where these differ-
ences are coming from. This is why we mainly focus our discussion
around the significant interactions.
participant continued moving between the two target zones
at the same tempo, despite the absence of a metronome. The movement performance measured after exposure to
a consonant as compared to a dissonant metronome was
found to be less variable and more precise, with a higher
percentage of information/movement coupling (tau cou-
pling) and a higher degree of movement circularity (indi-
cating a smoother oscillatory motion). This result suggests
that the internal neural resonance of the sound just heard is
more accurate when the sound is consonant than when it
is dissonant, resulting in better guidance of the movement,
which gives rise to more stable movement patterns. If this
is the case, then an internal clock model such as the Wing
and Kristofferson model (1973) should also consider the
multiple aspects present in the structure of auditory cues
(e.g., consonant/dissonant pitch intervals). It is worth not-
ing that, in the synchronization phase, when participants
were moving under the continual guidance of a metronome,
no difference between consonant or dissonant sounds was
present either for accuracy or for variability. These results
suggest that the continual metronome beat leads to the pro-
duction of a metric pattern of movement that is independ-
ent of the harmonic content of the sounds. The consonant and dissonant intervals also had an effect
on movement harmonicity, with consonant intervals result-
ing in more sinusoidal movements compared with dis-
sonant ones, with this again being more evident during
the continuation phase. Rodger and Craig (2011) showed
Fig. 7   a Average circularity index for all 13 participants for both
consonant and dissonant conditions during the continuation phase.
b Averaged data from two participants (6 and 8) when moving with
consonant and dissonant metronomes during the continuation phase. The averaged normalized velocity profile plotted against normal-
ized displacement, and shaded regions around the velocity profiles
represent error bars (SEM). For subject number 6, movements are
more circular in form for consonant (red dots) than dissonant inter-
vals (black dots), while subject number 8 showed a similar pattern of
movement circularity for both intervals. The blue dots indicate the
velocity profile of a perfect sinusoidal movement (color figure online)
Fig. 8   R2 values from the tau-coupling regression analysis were
averaged across all 13 participants for both consonant and dissonant
conditions in the two different stimuli presentation conditions (syn-
chronization and continuation). Error bars denote standard errors. Significant comparisons between conditions are indicated with an
asterisk (*p < 0.05)

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
already that the dynamics of synchronizing movements
with continuous sounds were more circular when compared
to discrete sounds. Here, our results reinforce the idea that
the degree of consonance of sounds influences the shape of
oscillatory movements between target zones even during
un-paced movement. This result highlights how the level
of consonance of the inter-beat intervals plays an impor-
tant role in governing the pattern of movement even when
the auditory guide is no longer present. This suggests that
when moving with consonant and dissonant time intervals,
the neural structures representing the demarcation of time
resonate internally in different ways. By testing the tau-coupling theory, we found that pre-
senting dissonant intervals leads to a marked decline in the
percentage of information/movement coupling. According
to Craig et  al. (2005), when movements need to be syn-
chronized with acoustic beats, the sensorimotor control
of this process involves coupling the tau of the movement
(the time to closure of the spatial gap at its current clo-
sure rate) onto a tau-guide (a dynamic temporal imprint of
the inter-beat interval generated in the brain that continu-
ally specifies the time remaining until the next beat will
sound). Based on this idea, the dynamic temporal imprint
produced when listening to consonant intervals leads to a
more robust temporal representation of that time interval. Having a more robust guide would allow for better action
control and lead to better synchronization compared with
dissonant beats. Craig et al. (2005) also demonstrated that
at certain inter-beat intervals (2.5/3 s) there was a decline
in the proportion of coupling between prospective informa-
tion (tau-guide) and hand movements, which resulted in a
significant reduction in interceptive performance. Here, we
showed that in addition to temporal information specify-
ing the time gap between auditory beats, the context of the
auditory information (i.e., the level of consonance of the
intervals) also provides information that can enhance the
synchronization of movement. So why does the level of consonance of musical inter-
vals invite different movement strategies during continu-
ation and synchronization tasks? Firstly, it is important to
recall that the differences found for consonant over dis-
sonant sounds were particularly emphasized during the
continuation phase, suggesting that the quality of a sound
will affect the structure of the internal dynamic temporal
imprint that guides action when external stimuli are absent. A possible explanation is that during the synchronization
task, the stimuli duration can be repeatedly encoded when
the metronome is present, allowing for a more precise
reproduction of that interval duration. On the other hand,
during the continuation phase, participants need to repre-
sent and reproduce the metrical pattern from memory. We
hypothesized that this is due to different emotional states
evoked by the sounds (as shown by the behavioral result),
which in turn affects the types of movement produced
when external stimuli are absent and subjects continued to
move at the same rate from memory (continuation phase). Moreover, it might be due to the diverse feelings of “ten-
sion” and “resolution” in dissonant and consonant musical
intervals. The concept is well known in music theory: Dis-
sonant intervals increase tension and often lead to a reso-
lution to consonant intervals, which change the primary
sensation of tension to a more stable feeling (for a review
see Koelsch 2014; Lehne et al. 2013, 2014; Farbood 2012; Sorce 1995). Thus, moving under unresolved (incomplete)
auditory events could lead to relatively poor timing per-
formance during the continuation phase. Another reason
might be that the perception of the duration of the inter-
beat interval evoked by the auditory events may be differ-
ent (i.e., a disruption of the perception of time is caused by
the unpleasant beating in dissonant sounds). Interestingly,
it has been shown that emotional valence of music modu-
lates time perception (Droit-Volet et  al. 2013). However,
further experiments must be carried out to gain a better
understanding of the effect of consonance and dissonance
intervals on time perception. Either way, we show that the
type of sound appears to affect the sensorimotor response,
even though the interval duration remains the same. The hierarchical rating of consonance (i.e., “pleas-
antness”) and their parallel usage in music composition
(Krumhansl 1990) might explain why the degrees of musi-
cal tonality affect movement time and trajectory differ-
ently in a sensorimotor continuation task. Neuroimaging
studies have revealed robust differences in the processing
of musical intervals at both cortical (e.g., premotor cortex: Minati et al. 2009) and subcortical levels (e.g., brainstem: Bidelman and Krishnan 2009, 2011), which would imply
the involvement of networks involved in both sensory and
cognitive processing. A recent review paper has extensively
discussed the effects of consonant/dissonant sounds on
motor processes in the brain (Koelsch 2014). Moreover, it
has been suggested that the preferential encoding of con-
sonant pitch intervals might be rooted in a more robust and
coherent neuronal synchronization when compared to dis-
sonant pitch intervals (Tramo et al. 2001; McKinney et al.
2001; Fishman et al. 2001). Importantly, Tierney and Kraus
(2013) provided evidence for a link between the ability to
synchronize movements to an auditory beat and the consist-
ency of auditory brainstem timing. Thus, a more robust and
synchronous phase-locking response in the brainstem when
presented with consonant rather than dissonant pitch inter-
vals (Bidelman and Krishnan 2009, 2011) could explain the
higher degree of consistency found in this study when sub-
jects synchronize movements to consonant stimuli. Further evidence suggests that both the cerebellum and
the basal ganglia are the cornerstone of an internal tim-
ing system (Ivry 1997; Diedrichsen et al. 2003). Recently, Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
Claassen et al. (2013) tested cerebellar disorders (CD) and
PD, using a synchronization–continuation paradigm, to
decipher the role of the cerebellum and basal ganglia in
motor timing. They found that CD participants were less
accurate than PD patients during the continuation phase,
suggesting a specialized role for the cerebellum in inter-
nal timing (Claassen et al. 2013). Hence, it is possible to
speculate that consonant pitch intervals may activate the
cerebellum more than dissonant ones, and this may account
for the better and more precise clocking of fine movements. For a better understanding of this mechanism, it would
be interesting to investigate how the sensorimotor system
in cooperation with the auditory system extracts relevant
information embedded in the musical pitch intervals to
control movements in a synchronization–continuation task. By knowing better why consonant musical pitch inter-
vals can benefit the synchronization of movement com-
pared with their dissonant counterparts, we might be able
to use them as auditory guides to improve movement per-
formance in patients with sensory–motor deficits, such as
in PD (Rodger et al. 2013). It has been shown that acoustic
guides for movement are beneficial in reducing spatial and
temporal gait variability in PD patients (Young et al. 2014; Bien´kiewicz et al. 2014; Young et al. 2013). Moreover, the
notion that different musical chords evoke different emo-
tions, which in turn can potentially drive the generation of
different movement patterns, might be applied to the mod-
els of affective engagements with music involving body
movement and dance. Further experimental exploration on
the relationship between sensorimotor coupling with music
and emotion might shed light on why some dances are set
to certain kinds of music. It should be noted that the pre-
sent experiment assessed the perceptual motor ability in a
normal population and will be used in the future as a model
for testing expert musicians. A tentative hypothesis can be
advanced where one might expect that expert musicians
will not differ in their performance when synchronizing
their movement to consonant and dissonant sound intervals. This putative result would add to our knowledge of the per-
ceptual–motor changes that result from learning a musical
instrument. Conclusions
In the present study, we tested the effects of musical con-
sonance/dissonance on sensorimotor timing in a synchro-
nization–continuation paradigm during which participants
performed reciprocal aiming movements. Remarkably,
the analysis of the participants’ movement in the continu-
ation phase revealed that after listening to consonant as
opposed to dissonant intervals smaller absolute synchroni-
zation errors and spread of errors were found. Furthermore,
a higher percentage of movement was tau-coupled and a
higher degree of movement circularity was also found. It
might be argued that musical pitch combinations caused
alterations in perceived tempo during the synchroniza-
tion phase that, in turn, resulted in a different regulation of
motor commands during the continuation phase. Overall, it
was found that the harmonic aspects of the musical struc-
ture systematically affected both the movement form and
timing. We believe that this research yields new insights
into the nature of the innate bias that makes consonance
perceptually more attractive than dissonance. Acknowledgments  This study was partly supported by an ERC
Starting Grant (ERC 210007) TEMPUS_G. The authors wish to thank
Stefan Koelsch and one anonymous reviewer for their valuable com-
ments and suggestions. Open Access  This article is distributed under the terms of the Crea-
tive Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribu-
tion, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s)
and the source are credited. References
Bidelman GM, Heinz MG (2011) Auditory-nerve responses predict
pitch attributes related to musical consonance-dissonance for
normal and impaired hearing. J Acoust Soc Am 130:1488–1502.
doi:10.1121/1.3605559
Bidelman GM, Krishnan A (2009) Neural correlates of consonance, dis-
sonance, and the hierarchy of musical pitch in the human brainstem. J
Neurosci 29:13165–13171. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3900-09.2009
Bidelman GM, Krishnan A (2011) Brainstem correlates of behavioral
and compositional preferences of musical harmony. Neuroreport
22:212–216. doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e328344a689
Bien´kiewicz MMN, Rodger MWM, Craig CM (2012) Timekeep-
ing strategies operate independently from spatial and accu-
racy demands in beat-interception movements. Exp Brain Res
222:241–253. doi:10.1007/s00221-012-3211-8
Bien´kiewicz MMN, Young W, Craig CM (2014) Balls to the wall: how
acoustic information from a ball in motion guides interceptive move-
ment in people with Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 275:508–518
Brattico E, Tervaniemi M, Näätänen R, Peretz I (2006) Musical scale
properties are automatically processed in the human auditory cor-
tex. Brain Res 1117:162–174. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2006.08.023
Carello C, Wagman J, Turvey M (2005) Acoustic specification of
object properties. Mov image theory Ecol consid. Southern Illi-
nois University Press, pp 79–104
Claassen DO, Jones CRG, Yu M et al (2013) Deciphering the impact
of cerebellar and basal ganglia dysfunction in accuracy and
variability of motor timing. Neuropsychologia 51:267–274.
doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.018
Craig C, Pepping GJ, Grealy M (2005) Intercepting beats in predes-
ignated target zones. Exp Brain Res 165:490–504. doi:10.1007/
s00221-005-2322-x
Diedrichsen J, Ivry R, Pressing J (2003) Functional and Neural Mech-
anisms of Interval Timing. Meck, WH, Funct neural Mech inter-
val timing 19:457–483. doi:10.1201/9780203009574
Droit-Volet S, Ramos D, Bueno JLO, Bigand E (2013) Music, emo-
tion, and time perception: The influence of subjective emo-
tional valence and arousal? Front Psychol 4:417. doi:10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00417

Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:1585–1595
1 3
Farbood MM (2012) A parametric, temporal model of musical tension. Music Percept Interdiscip J 29:387–428. doi:10.1525/mp.2012.29.4.387
Fishman YI, Volkov IO, Noh MD et al (2001) Consonance and dis-
sonance of musical chords: neural correlates in auditory cortex of
monkeys and humans. J Neurophysiol 86:2761–2788
Foss AH, Altschuler EL, James KH (2007) Neural correlates of the
pythagorean ratio rules. Neuroreport 18:1521–1525. doi:10.1097/
WNR.0b013e3282ef6b51
Fritz T, Jentschke S, Gosselin N et  al (2009) Universal recogni-
tion of three basic emotions in music. Curr Biol 19:573–576.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2009.02.058
Gaver WW (1993) What in the world do we hear? An ecological
approach to auditory event perception. Ecol Psychol 5:1–29
Helmholtz H (1954) On the Sensations of Tone as a physiological
basis for the theory of music. Dover Publications, New York
Itoh K, Suwazono S, Nakada T (2010) Central auditory processing of
noncontextual consonance in music: an evoked potential study. J
Acoust Soc Am 128:3781–3787. doi:10.1121/1.3500685
Ivry R (1997) Cerebellar timing systems. Int Rev Neurobiol
41:555–573
Kaiser R, Keller PE (2011) Music’s impact on the visual percep-
tion of emotional dyadic interactions. Music Sci 15:270–287.
doi:10.1177/1029864911401173
Koelsch S (2014) Brain correlates of music-evoked emotions. Nat
Rev Neurosci 15:170–180. doi:10.1038/nrn3666
Koelsch S, Fritz T, Cramon V, DY et  al (2006) Investigating emo-
tion with music: an fMRI study. Hum Brain Mapp 27:239–250.
doi:10.1002/hbm.20180
Krohn KI, Brattico E, Välimäki V, Tervaniemi M (2007) Neural repre-
sentations of the hierarchical scale pitch structure. Music Percept
Interdiscip J 24:281–296. doi:10.1525/mp.2007.24.3.281
Krumhansl CL (1990) Cognitive Foundations of Musical Pitch. Oxford University Press, New York
Lee D (1998) Guiding movement by coupling taus. Ecol Psychol
10:221–250
Lehne M, Rohrmeier M, Gollmann D, Koelsch S (2013) The influ-
ence of different structural features on felt musical tension in two
piano pieces by Mozart and Mendelssohn. Music Percept Inter-
discip J 31:171–185
Lehne M, Rohrmeier M, Koelsch S (2014) Tension-related activity in
the orbitofrontal cortex and amygdala: an fMRI study with music. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 9:1515–1523. doi:10.1093/scan/nst141
Lim I, van Wegen E, de Goede C et  al (2005) Effects of external
rhythmical cueing on gait in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a
systematic review. Clin Rehabil 19:695–713
Masataka N (2006) Preference for consonance over dissonance by
hearing newborns of deaf parents and of hearing parents. Dev Sci
9:46–50. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00462.x
Maslennikova AV, Varlamov AA, Strelets VB (2013) Evoked changes in
EEG band power on perception of consonant and dissonant chords. Neurosci Behav Physiol 43:670–673. doi:10.1007/s11055-013-9790-4
Mckinney MF, Tramo MJ, Delgutte B (2001) Neural correl music
dissonance Infer colliculus. Physiological psychophysical bases
auditory function In: Breebaart DJ, Houtsma AJM, Kohlrausch
A, Prijs VF, Schoonhoven R, (eds) Neural correlates of musical
dissonance in the inferior colliculus, pp 83–89
Minati L, Rosazza C, D’Incerti L et  al (2009) Functional MRI/
event-related potential study of sensory consonance and disso-
nance in musicians and nonmusicians. Neuroreport 20:87–92.
doi:10.1097/WNR.0b013e32831af235
Phillips DP, Hall SE, Boehnke SE (2002) Central auditory onset
responses, and temporal asymmetries in auditory perception. Hear Res 167:192–205
Repp BH, Su YH (2013) Sensorimotor synchronization: a review of
recent research (2006-2012). Psychon Bull Rev 20:403–452.
doi:10.3758/s13423-012-0371-2
Rodger MWM, Craig CM (2011) Timing movements to interval dura-
tions specified by discrete or continuous sounds. Exp Brain Res
214:393–402. doi:10.1007/s00221-011-2837-2
Rodger MWM, Craig CM (2013)Moving with Beats and Loops: the
Structure of Auditory Events and Sensorimotor Timing. Proc
10th International Symposium Computer Music Multidiscipline
Research Marseille, Friday Oct 15–18, 1–13
Rodger MWM, Young WR, Craig CM (2013) Synthesis of walking
sounds for alleviating gait disturbances in Parkinson’s disease. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 22(3):543–548
Sammler D, Grigutsch M, Fritz T, Koelsch S (2007) Music and
emotion: electrophysiological correlates of the processing of
pleasant and unpleasant music. Psychophysiology 44:293–304.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2007.00497.x
Satoh M, Kuzuhara S (2008) Training in mental singing while walk-
ing improves gait disturbance in Parkinson’s disease patients. Eur
Neurol 60:237–243. doi:10.1159/000151699
Schwartz DA, Howe CQ, Purves D (2003) The statistical structure
of human speech sounds predicts musical universals. J Neurosci
23:7160–7168
Sievers B, Polansky L, Casey M, Wheatley T (2013) Music and move-
ment share a dynamic structure that supports universal expressions
of emotion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110:70–75. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1209023110
Sorce R (1995) Music Theory for the Music Professional. Ardsley
House, New York
Styns F, van Noorden L, Moelants D, Leman M (2007) Walking on music. Hum Mov Sci 26:769–785. doi:10.1016/j.humov.2007.07.007
Thaut M (1997) Music versus metronome timekeeper in a rhythmic
motor task. Int J arts Med 5:4–12
Thaut MH, Abiru M (2010) Rhythmic auditory stimulation in reha-
bilitation of movement disorders: a review of current research. Music Percept 27:263–269. doi:10.1525/mp.2010.27.4.263
Tierney A, Kraus N (2013) The ability to move to a beat is linked
to the consistency of neural responses to sound. J Neurosci
33:14981–14988. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0612-13.2013
Tillmann B, Janata P, Bharucha JJ (2003) Activation of the inferior
frontal cortex in musical priming. Ann NY Acad Sci 999:209–211
Trainor L, Tsang C, Cheung V (2002) Preference for sensory conso-
nance in 2- and 4-month-old infants. Music Percept 20:187–194
Tramo MJ, Cariani PA, Delgutte B, Braida LD (2001) Neurobiologi-
cal foundations for the theory of harmony in western tonal music. Ann NY Acad Sci 930:92–116
Vos PG, Troost JIMM (1989) Ascending and descending melodic
intervals: statistical findings and their perceptual relevance. Music Percept 6:383–396
Wing AM, Kristofferson AB (1973) The timing of interresponse inter-
vals. Percept Psychophys 13:455–460. doi:10.3758/BF03205802
Wittwer JE, Webster KE, Hill K (2013) Music and metronome cues
produce different effects on gait spatiotemporal measures but not
gait variability in healthy older adults. Gait Posture 37:219–222.
doi:10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.07.006
Young WR, Rodger MWM, Craig CM (2013) Perceiving and re-
enacting spatio-temporal characteristics of walking sounds. J Exp
Psychol Hum Percept Perform 39:464–476
Young WR, Rodger MWM, Craig CM (2014) Auditory observation of
stepping actions can cue both spatial and temporal components of
gait in Parkinson׳s disease patients. Neuropsychologia 57:140–
153. doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.03.009
Zentner M, Eerola T (2010) Rhythmic engagement with music in
infancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:5768–5773. doi:10.1073/
pnas.1000121107
Zentner MR, Kagan J (1998) Infants’ perception of consonance and
dissonance in music. Infant Behav Dev 21:483–492. doi:10.1016/
S0163-6383(98)90021-2
