# I (6)

**Year:** D:20

---




## COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE AND NEUROPSYCHOLOGY

NEUROREPORT
Neural correlates of the Pythagorean ratio rules
Alexander H. Fossa, Eric L. Altschulerb,c and Karin H. Jamesa
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC
ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/08/2023
aDepartment of Psychology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, bDepartment of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey, University Hospital, Newark, New Jersey and cBrain and Perception Laboratory, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA
Correspondence to Eric L. Altschuler, MD, PhD, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, University Hospital,150 Bergen Street, B-403, Newark, New Jersey, USA
Tel: +1973 972 5439; fax: +1973 972 5727; e-mail: eric.altschuler@umdnj.edu
or
Requests for materials and methods to Karin H. James, PhD, Department of Psychology, Indiana University,1101East10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, Indiana, USA
Tel: +1812 856 0659; fax: +1812 855 4691; e-mail: khjames@indiana.edu
Received13 May 2007; accepted17 May 2007
Millennia ago Pythagoras noted a simple but remarkably powerful
the neurophysiologic correlates of the ratio rules. In musicians, the
rule for the aesthetics of tone combinations: pairs of tones ^ inter-
inferior frontal gyrus, superior temporal gyrus, medial frontal
vals ^ with simple ratios such as an octave (ratio 2:1) or a ¢fth
gyrus, inferior parietal lobule and anterior cingulate respond
(ratio 3: 2) were pleasant sounding (consonant), whereas intervals
with progressively more activation to perfect consonances, imper-
with complex ratios such as the major seventh (ratio 243:128)
fect consonances and dissonances. In nonmusicians only the
were harsh (dissonant). These Pythagorean ratio rules are the
right inferior frontal gyrus follows this pattern. NeuroReport
building blocks of Western classical music; however, their neuro-
18:1521^1525 c 2007 Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams
physiologic basis is notknown. Using functional MRI we have found
& Wilkins. Keywords: functional MRI, neural correlates, Pythagorean ratio rules
Introduction
More than two and a half millennia ago, Pythagoras
proposed a simple but remarkably powerful rule for the
aesthetics of tone combinations [1]: pairs of tones – intervals
– with simple ratios, such as an octave (ratio 2: 1) or a fifth
(ratio 3: 2) were pleasant sounding or consonant to the ear,
whereas intervals with a complex ratio such as a major
seventh (ratio 243: 128) were harsh or dissonant sounding. As all Western classical music harmonies and melodies are
based, at their root, on progressions of consonant intervals
and resolutions of dissonant ones, the Pythagorean ratio
rule is central. The positive correlation between physical
complexity and level of perceived dissonance is likely not a
coincidence: some underlying neurophysiologic mechanism
must be responsible for translating the frequency ratios into
subjective qualia in an orderly and consistent manner. Much
recent work (e.g. Ref. [2] and References therein) has found
that cortical activation patterns measured by functional MRI
(fMRI) can reveal much about pitch and interval perception. We have studied, using fMRI, the cortical activation patterns
of musicians and nonmusicians to consonant and dissonant
intervals. We find that neural activation is much more
engaged in all participants when they listen to dissonant
intervals compared with listening to consonant intervals. We also find that in musicians all the cortical areas that are
activated during the intervals task show the Pythagorean
response ratio: sevenths showing greater responses than
sixths, which show greater responses than fifths. In
nonmusicians, we find a single area that responds according
to this rule: the right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG). The basis
for the Pythagorean ratio rules might lie in cortical
activation patterns. Interestingly, although much exploration of the neural
basis of the Pythagorean ratio rules has not taken place, a
number of recent papers have dealt with the different, but
potentially related, question of the neural correlates of
listening to emotionally evocative music [3–8]. These papers
have found that emotionally evocative music activates a
network of brain areas that have been associated with
emotion processing. Blood and colleagues [3] studied, using
positron emission tomography (PET), the neural correlates
not only of sad and happy segments of music, but also of
pleasant (consonant)/harsh (dissonant) segments. They used
more complex stimuli than those in our study, incorporating
consonance/dissonance into chords, not intervals, and using
a melodic structure and not isolated presentations of
intervals. They found a preferential increase in blood flow
in response to dissonance in the right parahippocampal
gyrus and a preferential decrease in the right orbital frontal
cortex and medial subcallosal cingulate. Consonant intervals are traditionally divided into the
so-called ‘perfect ’ consonances – unisons, octaves and fifths
– that vibrate with simpler frequency ratios, and the
‘imperfect ’ consonant intervals – major and minor thirds
and sixths – that vibrate with more complex ratios. Major and
minor seconds and sevenths and the tritone or the diminished
fifth/augmented fourth constitute the dissonant intervals
with the most complex ratios.
0959-4965 c Wolters Kluwer Health | Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
Vol 18 No 15 8 October 2007

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. NEUROREPORT

## FOSS ETAL. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC
ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/08/2023
For centuries after Pythagoras, his tuning system based on
exact perfect consonances predominated. As Western music
increased in complexity and range, however, slight mod­
ifications to the Pythagorean scale became necessary to
preserve consistently tuned intervals across extremely large
intervals (greater than one or two octaves) and small ones
(half steps and intervals that are difficult to standardize
using Pythagorean tuning). The difficulty arising from the
increased range is apparent when one goes through 12
perfect fifths, for example, from the note C to a C seven
octaves higher: the ratio of the harmonic to the fundamental
starting tone is (3/2)12¼129.746. Going from a C to one
seven octaves higher via the octave route, however,
produces a tone with a frequency that has a ratio
(2/1)7¼128 times higher than the starting tone. This small
difference ultimately requires some temperament or mod­
ification of pure harmonic intervals to construct and tune
instruments that can play pieces written with tones that
span multiple octaves. Numerous fixes or temperaments for
this problem have been devised over the centuries [1]. The
one used almost universally today is known as equal
temperament, in which the discrepancy of 1.746 is divided
by narrowing each of the 12 previously perfect fifths in the
seven-octave span, resulting in the 12 notes of the chromatic
scale. Thus in equal temperament the fifths are no longer
perfect, only close. With this caveat of equal tempering – the temperament in
which Western listeners are accustomed to hearing music –
informing our search for neural correlates to the Pythagor­
ean rules, we chose to study the neural activation pattern
associated with hearing the perfect fifth (1.498: 1), major
sixth (1.682: 1) and major seventh (1.888: 1). Our a-priori
hypothesis was that there would be a significant difference
between the activation patterns for the perfect fifth and the
major seventh with, perhaps, the activation pattern asso­
ciated with the major sixth being somehow intermediate to
the other two. Such a pattern would be a cortical ‘reflection’
of the Pythagorean ratio rule. Methods
Participants
Thirteen paid participants without perfect pitch by self-
report (six musicians and seven nonmusicians) were
scanned in a 3-T whole-body Siemens Trio scanner (Siemens
Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). Of the musicians,
all were pianists and four were men with an average age
of 20.3 years. Music lessons were started before they were
5.5 years old. The musicians reported that they had played
for an average of 3 h/day for the previous 5 years. All
musicians were undergraduate students in the music
program at Indiana University majoring in piano perfor­
mance. Of the nonmusicians, three were men, their average
age was 22.5 years and they all had fewer than 2 years of
any musical experience and no private lessons. The
nonmusicians were also undergraduate or graduate stu­
dents at Indiana University. Informed consent was obtained
and the study protocol was approved by the Indiana
University Human Subjects Review Board. Stimulus presentation
All participants completed two runs of the consonant/
dissonant intervals task, each of which consisted of three
different types of intervals: major sevenths, major sixths and
fifths. Each interval was presented in a pseudorandom
order as a single event for 4 s with a 12-s interevent interval. Six of each type of interval were presented per run for a total
of 18 intervals per run. To avoid brain activation pattern
associated with given tones, the fundamental note for each
participant was randomized across the octave between the
A below and above the middle C. Participants were asked to
simply listen to the intervals. We had a passive listening task
to avoid requiring performance in a task that the musicians
could do, and which the nonmusicians could not. In other
words, we did not want to confound activation to the
stimulus with activation to the level of performance in a
task. The intervals were presented as an extra listening task
after another study on music perception that involved
syntax decisions to be made on hearing sentences and chord
progressions. The participants were, therefore, naive to the
purpose of this study. In addition, presenting the intervals
within the context of another study was performed to isolate
the activation patterns associated with the sounds of the
intervals themselves from other musical context effects. Data collection
Anatomical images were acquired using conventional
parameters. All scanning was performed with a Siemens
Trio 3-T MRI housed in the Psychological and Brain Sciences
department at Indiana University. T2* scan parameters were
as follows: repetition time (TR), 2 s; echo time (TE), 30 ms;
flip angle (FA), 901; 219 images/slice, with 25 coronal slices
(4-mm thick and 0-mm gap) acquired parallel to the anterior
commissure–posterior commissure (AC–PC) plane. Stimuli
were presented through Siemens headphones. Functional
data underwent slice time correction, three-dimensional
motion correction, linear trend removal and Gaussian
spatial blurring (full-width at half-maximum, 4 mm) using
the analysis tools in Brain Voyager (Brain Innovation, Maastricht, The Netherlands). Individual functional vo­
lumes were coregistered to anatomical volumes with an
intensity-matching, rigid-body transformation algorithm. Data analysis
Analyses were conducted with the Brain Voyager software
package and customized Matlab scripts. Statistical para­
metric maps (SPMs) of blood oxygenation level-dependent
(BOLD) activation were created for the average activation
for all participants using a statistical threshold of Po0.0001
(uncorrected). From this analysis, we then created SPMs for
each group separately (musicians and nonmusicians) and
then for each individual participant, using a threshold of
Po0.01. The SPMs were corrected using the false discovery
rate method, which controls for the expected proportion of
false-positive voxels among those that are suprathreshold
[9]. We then contrasted the dissonant intervals with
consonant ones, which resulted in several regions of interest
(ROIs). We only considered the regions that (a) were
apparent in the group maps, (b) were also apparent in a
majority of the individual maps, (c) had 10 contiguous
voxels of significant activation and (d) passed our statistical
thresholds. We then looked at the hemodynamic response
curves within these ROIs to investigate whether the
responses to the three intervals followed a Pythagorean
response pattern. The peaks of these response curves are
presented in Fig. 1.
152 2
Vol 18 No 15 8 October 2007
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.














## PYTHAGOREAN RATIO RULES: NEURAL CORRELATES

NEUROREPORT
Results
We first performed a simple contrast in all participants
between the dissonant and consonant intervals. We were
interested in this contrast for two reasons: first, as an initial
analysis of how the brain responds to these types of
intervals, and second, to determine the ROIs for further
in-depth analyses. When BOLD activation to dissonant
intervals was directly compared with activation to con­
sonant intervals (fifths in this case), several brain regions
were engaged more during the dissonant than the con­
(a)
Right
Left

## Y= 18

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC
ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/08/2023
% BOLD signal change
sonant intervals. All participants had significantly greater
activation to the dissonant intervals in their IFGs: bilaterally
(location of peak activation in Talairach [10] coordinates:
x,y,z) (i) at ( 10, 18, 9) and (43,19,1) (Fig. 1a); in the left
superior temporal gyrus (STG) ( 58,
30, 14), in the left
middle temporal gyrus (MTG) (53, 32, 9) (Fig. 1b), in the
left middle frontal gyrus (MFG) ( 39, 43, 14) (Fig. 1c), in
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1

−0.1
0.1

−0.2
Musicians Novices
Musicians
Novices
the inferior parietal lobule (IPL) ( 47,
49, 41) (Fig. 1d), in
the left precentral gyrus ( 38,
23, 55) in the anterior
(b)
(c)
cingulate ( 5, 8, 44) (Fig. 1e), sub-cortically in the thalamus
( + / 13, 10, 10), and in the right cerebellum (13,
74,
19). This group pattern, however, varied depending on whether
or not the participants were musicians. Specifically, the musicians did not have a dissonance–
consonance difference in the right IFG, left precentral gyrus,
left MTG, or in the thalamus. No regions were activated in
the musicians that were not significantly active in the
average maps.

## Y = −30

## Y= −43

We then performed further analyses to determine the
response patterns of the BOLD activation within the ROIs
determined by our first contrast. Here, we were interested in
seeing whether or not we would see a neural pattern that
reflected the Pythagorean response ratio: that is, sevenths
greater than sixths greater than fifths. As shown in Fig. 1,
this analysis provided us with interesting results. In
musicians, neural activation in five ROIs evoked a pattern
% BOLD signal change
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1

Musicians
Novices
Musicians
Novices
that conformed to the Pythagorean ratio: left IFG (Fig. 1a),
(d)
(e)
left STG (Fig. 1b), left MFG (Fig. 1c), left inferior parietal
lobule (Fig. 1d) and the anterior cingulate (Fig. 1e). In
novices, one ROI evoked this pattern: the right IFG (Fig. 1a). Overall, whenever the musicians showed significant activa­
tion to dissonant over consonant intervals, the BOLD
response pattern reflected the Pythagorean ratio rule.

## Y = −49

## Y = 8

Discussion
Several results from this experiment are worth noting. First,
the neural activation to dissonant intervals is significantly
greater overall than consonant intervals when we examine
activation of all participants. In fact, no brain region
displayed the reverse pattern of activation. Why would
the dissonant intervals recruit neural regions more than
consonant intervals? One hypothesis is that dissonance in
% BOLD signal change
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.1

−0.1
−0.1
−0.2 Musicians
Novices
Musicians
Novices
general might activate neural systems more than conso­
nance. Another hypothesis involves the baseline used: we
used all possible comparisons among the three interval
types. Perhaps the fifths and sixths are not different enough
to produce significantly different activation patterns. This
explanation, however, does not address why the fifths are
never higher than sevenths (see Fig. 1, no activation of
fifths4sevenths). Our results therefore suggest that when it
comes to auditory perception of intervals, ‘harsh’ sounding,
dissonant intervals will always recruit a music-processing
system more than a pleasant sounding, consonant interval. Sevenths
Sixths
Fifths
Fig. 1 Regions of interest (ROIs) following the Pythagorean response
rule. (a) Inferior frontal gyrus (IFG): right follows rule for nonmusicians,
left for musicians. (b) The left superior temporal gyrus (STG) follows the
Pythagorean rules for the musicians, as do the left middle frontal gyrus
(MFG) (c), the left inferior parietal lobule (d) and the anterior cingulate
(e). Activation is shown thatis at Po0.001for a group analysis. Histograms
depict blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) responses to all
interval conditions in the ROIs. Vol 18 No 15 8 October 2007
152 3
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited. NEUROREPORT

## FOSS ETAL. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC
ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/08/2023
As we noted, there has been considerable work on neural
activity associated with pleasant and unpleasant stimuli
[3–8,11,12]. It would have thus been helpful if, after
scanning, we had asked the participants about their
opinions of the emotional nature of the stimuli we
presented. In future studies either by us or by others, it
will be helpful to do so. The second result of interest is that the pattern of
activation to dissonant intervals reveals the involvement
of several interesting brain regions including the IFG, the
MFG, the STG and the anterior cingulate (Fig. 1). Several of
these regions have been shown to be involved in music
perception in previous work (for review, see Ref. [2]). Zatorre et al. [13], for example, in a tone-listening task,
found increased activation in the auditory cortices (STG)
and the left posterior dorsolateral frontal cortex in musicians
with and without perfect pitch, and in the right IFG in
participants without perfect pitch, but not with perfect
pitch. In addition, Maess et al. [14] found that nonmusicians
presented with syntactically inappropriate sequences of
chords showed increased neural activity in bilateral IFG
compared with neural activity in response to syntactically
appropriate sequences. In general, music processing is
thought to follow a similar neural path as language
processing, but is often more lateralized to the right, at
least in nonmusicians [15]. Our results demonstrate that
nonmusicians show significant activation in the right IFG to
dissonant intervals, whereas musicians show more activa­
tion in the left IFG. This finding supports the hypothesis
that musicians might use the language network more for
processing music than do nonmusicians [12]. Activation in
the anterior cingulate might be related to the ‘error
detection’ [16,17] occurring, whereas the musicians attend
to dissonant intervals. The nonmusicians, however, reported
that the dissonant intervals sounded more harsh than the
consonant intervals, but showed less anterior cingulate
activation. Blood and colleagues [3] found a decreased
blood flow response to dissonance (and an increased blood
flow response to consonance) in the right orbitofrontal
cortex. A number of reasons may explain why we did not
find this as well. The orbitofronal cortex is more difficult to
image with fMRI than with PET scanning; hence this might
be why we did not obtain this response. Alternatively, it
could be that Blood and colleagues used consonant and
dissonant stimuli but in the more complex context of more
than two note chords in a progression, whereas we were
looking at activation due to responses to isolated pairs of
notes (intervals). The third, and perhaps most significant, finding from this
study is that the Pythagorean pattern of response emerges in
the left IFG, the left STG, the left MFG, left inferior parietal
lobule and the anterior cingulate in musicians (see Fig. 1),
and that this pattern only emerges in nonmusicians in the
right IFG. In an fMRI study investigating neural activation
to both syntactically irregular and syntactically simple
chord progressions, Koelsch et al. [18] found that the pattern
of activation that correlated with irregular chord progres­
sions was stronger in musicians than in nonmusicians in the
bilateral IFG and in the right anterior STG. This effect was
significant for both adults and children, and the results
suggest that the difference between musicians and non-
musicians is observable before the age of 10 years. This
overlap of function is notable because both syntactic
processing and dissonance judgments are abilities that are
honed with music training. When considered along with
Koelsch’s results, data from this study suggest that the left
IFG and STG are central neural regions involved in music
training. Our results, however, differ from theirs in that
there was no significant right STG activation to dissonant
over consonant intervals. Perhaps the left STG might be
involved in judgments of musical tension as indicated by
the relative levels of consonance and dissonance between
simultaneous pitches, whereas the right STG might be
involved in making syntactic judgments based on sequential
ordering of successive pitches or chords. We thus find that the basis of the Pythagorean rules might
lie in cortical activation patterns, specifically in the IFG, the
left STG, MFG, IPL and anterior cingulate. The hypothesis
would predict, for example, that activation patterns upon
hearing the interval of a second (third) should be similar to
that from a seventh (sixth), and different from that induced
by a sixth or third (second or seventh) or perfect fifth. It is
somewhat curious, perhaps, that this response pattern
manifests predominantly in musicians. It would be inter­
esting to see if, within the imperfect consonances or
dissonances, there are subtle differences in activation
patterns that perhaps correlate with the simplicity of
Pythagorean ratios. Finally, Bach on a number of occasions,
as for example in the third trumpet part in measure 24 of his
Cantata 130, actually used the fact that some of the partials
of the harmonics sound so far out of tune, or just wrong, in
any temperament as to sound wrong – the seventh partial, a
B-flat above a C fundamental is very flat – to emphasize
crucial words in the text such as ‘devil’. Such intervals then
sound not only very dissonant, but also wrong at least to
musicians, and thus lead to predictions of the neural
correlates of hearing such intervals. One might predict that
in all groups these intervals show neural activation as being
more dissonant than the response to a major seventh. Also,
perhaps only in musicians, either in isolation or in context,
areas of the brain that react to musical syntax [14] respond
equally well to such strategically placed wrong notes. Further study of the cortical activation pattern as a part or
whole of the explanation for the Pythagorean ratio rules is
warranted. Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by the Indiana
METACyt Initiative of Indiana University, funded in part
through a major grant from the Lilly Endowment, Inc. References

### 1. Helmholtz H. On the sensations of tone. (Trans: Alexander Ellis). Dover

Publications, New York, 1954 (1885).

### 2. Peretz I, Zatorre RJ. Brain organization for music processing. Ann Rev

Psychol 2005; 56:89–114.

### 3. Blood AJ, Zatorre RJ, Bermudez P, Evans AC. Emotional responses to

pleasant and unpleasant music correlate with activity in paralimbic brain
regions. Nat Neurosci 1999; 2:382–387.

### 4. Blood AJ, Zatorre RJ. Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate

with activity in brain regions implicated in reward and emotion. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2001; 98:11818–11823.

### 5. Brown S, Martinez MJ, Parsons LM. Passive music listening

spontaneously engages limbic and paralimbic systems. NeuroReport
2004; 15:2033–2037.

### 6. Baumgartner T, Lutz K, Schmidt CF, Jancke L. The emotional power of

music: how music enhances the feeling of affective pictures. Brain Res
2006; 1075:151–164. Vol 18 No 15 8 October 2007
Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

## PYTHAGOREAN RATIO RULES: NEURAL CORRELATES

NEUROREPORT

### 7. Eldar E, Ganor O, Admon R, Bleich A, Hendler T. Feeling the real world:

limbic response to music depends on related content. Cereb Cortex 2007; DOI 10.1093/cercor/bhm011.

### 8. Mitterschiffthaler MT, Fu CH, Dalton JA, Andrew CM, Williams SC. A functional MRI study of happy and sad affective states induced by
classical music. Hum Brain Mapp 2007; DOI 10.1002/hbm.20337.

### 9. Genovese CR, Lazar NA, Nichols D. Thresholding of statistical maps in

functional neuroimaging using the false discovery rate. Neuroimage 2002;
15:870–878.

### 10. Talairach J, Tournoux P. Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human brain. New

York: Thieme; 1988.

### 11. Zald DH, Pardo JV. The neural correlates of aversive auditory

stimulation. Neuroimage 2002; 16:746–753.

### 12. Pallesen KJ. Emotion processing of major, minor, and dissonant chords:

a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Ann NY Acad Sci 2005;
1060:450–453.

### 13. Zatorre RJ, Perry DW, Beckett CA, Westbury CF, Evans AC. Functional

anatomy of musical processing in listeners with absolute pitch and
relative pitch. Proc Nat Acad USA 1998; 95:3172–3177.

### 14. Maess B, Koelsch S, Gunter TC, Friederici AD. Musical syntax is

processed in Broca’s area: an MEG study. Nat Neurosci 2001; 4:
540–545.

### 15. Ohnishi T, Matsuda H, Asada T, Aruga M, Hirakata M, Nishikawa M,

et al. Functional anatomy of musical perception in musicians. Cereb Cortex
2001; 11:754–760.

### 16. Dehaene S, Posner M, Tucker D. Localization of a neural system for error

detection and compensation. Psychol Sci 1994; 5:303–305.

### 17. Brown JW, Braver TS. Learned predictions of error likelihood in the

anterior cingulate cortex. Science 2005; 307:1118–1121.

### 18. Koelsch S, Fritz T, Schulze K, Alsop D, Schlaug G. Adults and

children processing music: an fMRI study. Neuroimage 2005; 25:
1068–1076. Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/neuroreport by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hC
ywCX1AWnYQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 03/08/2023
Vol 18 No 15 8 October 2007

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
