# narratives-imagined-in-response-to-instrumental-mu

Narratives imagined in response to instrumental
music reveal culture-bounded intersubjectivity
Elizabeth H. Margulis a,1, Patrick C. M. Wong b , Cara Turnbull a , Benjamin M. Kubit c , and J. Devin McAuley d,1
aDepartment of Music, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544;bDepartment of Linguistics and Modern Languages, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong SAR, China; cDepartment of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544; anddDepartment of Psychology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, MI 48824
Edited by John Hajda, Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA; received June 4, 2021; accepted December 13, 2021,
by Editorial Board Member Michael S. Gazzaniga
The scienti ﬁc literature sometimes considers music an abstract
stimulus, devoid of explicit meaning, and at other times consid-
ers it a universal language. Here, individuals in three geographi-
cally distinct locations spanning two cultures performed a highly
unconstrained task: they provided free-response descriptions of
stories they imagined while listening to instrumental music. Tools
from natural language processing revealed that listeners provide
highly similar stories to the same musical excerpts when they
share an underlying culture, but when they do not, the generated
stories show limited overlap. These results paint a more complex
picture of music ’s power: music can generate remarkably similar
stories in listeners’ minds, but the degree to which these imagined
narratives are shared depends on the degree to which culture is
shared across listeners. Thus, music is neither an abstract stimulus
nor a universal language but has semantic affordances shaped by
culture, requiring more sustained attention from psychology.
music j narrative j imagination j culture j semantics
M
usic listening rarely involves exclusive focus on the sounds
themselves. Instead, listeners often experience a kind of
“distributed attentional focus” (1) where the sounds are heard
but attention rests more on an associated set of multisensory
imaginings, including visual imagery, autobiographical memories,
or kinesthetic sensations (2). One such mode of listening that
has been recently well documented involves hearing instru-
mental music narratively—i.e., imagining a story as the music
unfolds in time (3, 4).
Research on narrative listening has revealed that the degree of
a piece of music’s narrativity (the likelihood that the musical
excerpt triggers a story in listeners’ minds) as well as its narrative
engagement (how vivid and clear the events and characters of the
story are in listeners’ minds) varies from excerpt to excerpt, with
strong within-culture consistency and large between-cultural
differences for responses to individual pieces (3–5). Unknown,
however, is whether the content of the imagined stories varies
or converges across people and cultures because the previous
work from this project has used quantitative measures of nar-
rative perceptions and not focused on or analyzed the semantic
content of the narratives generated by listeners. A key question
that cannot be addressed without examining the free-response
stories themselves is to what extent are these imagined musical
narratives shared across listeners? At stake is the degree of
intersubjectivity around a fundamental aspect of musical experi-
ence and meaning construction. Are we all hearing and imagin-
ing the same thing when we listen to a piece of instrumental
music, or are our experiences hopelessly subjective?
Some indirect evidence that responses are characterized by
substantial intersubjectivity comes from McAuley et al. (5). Here,
the authors examined individuals’ ability to match narratives
to their corresponding musical excerpt—where the “correct”
match was a narrative generated by another individual in response
to the musical excerpt and where the individual was from the
same or a different culture. Results revealed that individuals
had remarkable success matching story descriptions to the cor-
responding excerpt as long as the to-be-matched narrative was
generated by an individual from the same culture. It is not clear,
however, that the capacity to recognize a narrative that another
listener might imagine would extend to a tendency to spontane-
ously generate a similar narrative when listening. Moreover, due
to the binary nature of the matching task, the similarity of imag-
ined narratives between different listeners could not be expressly
assessed. The present study directly addresses these questions by
examining the semantic similarity of the stories generated by lis-
teners in different geographical locations. Of particular interest
are the roles that musical style and more broadly culture may
play in constraining the stories that listeners imagine in response
to music.
The capacity to imagine stories constitutes one example of a
broader human capacity for scene construction, which under-
lies episodic memory and episodic future thinking as well as
the imagination of ﬁctional scenarios (6, 7). In fact, the bound-
ary between remembering something that happened to oneself
and imagining something that might happen to someone else
is thinner than might be expected—reliving a past series of
events and vividly constructing a hypothetical series of events are
“correlated highly enough to be considered the same empirical
measure” (ref. 6, p. 2). Given this functional equivalence, story
Signiﬁcance
Are we all imagining the same thing when we listen to
music, or are our experiences hopelessly subjective? This
research analyzes the similarity of responses from 622 partic-
ipants in three locations on a highly unconstrained task:
free-response descriptions of the stories they imagined
while listening to instrumental music. Strikingly, participants
in two separate locations that share an overarching culture
imagine highly similar narratives to individual excerpts. But
these similarity patterns do not extend to narratives imag-
ined by participants in a third location with a distinct cul-
ture. This work shows that music —often considered an
“abstract stimulus ”—can trigger shared stories in listeners ’
minds but that this intersubjectivity depends on a shared
underlying culture.
Author contributions: E.H.M., P.C.M.W., and J.D.M. designed research; E.H.M.,
P.C.M.W., C.T., and J.D.M. performed research; E.H.M., C.T., B.M.K., and J.D.M.
analyzed data; and E.H.M., P.C.M.W., C.T., B.M.K., and J.D.M. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. J.H. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial
Board.
This article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND) .
1 To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: margulis@princeton.edu or
dmcauley@msu.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at http://www.pnas.org/lookup/
suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2110406119/-/DCSupplemental.
Published January 21, 2022.
PNAS 2022 Vol. 119 No. 4 e2110406119 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 j 1o f1 1
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
imagination tasks can be understood to effectively probe essen-
tial cognitive processes.
Imagination does not just share core components with memory,
it also constitutes a fundamental part of perception. Perceiving
a cat half-hidden behind a tree involves imagining the missing
back of the cat (8). In a study from 1910, participants asked to
visualize objects while staring at a white wall thought they were
imagining the objects but were actually perceiving objects that
had been subtly projected on the wall (9). Thus, the boundary
between perception and imagination can seem as porous as the
one between memory and imagination. This ﬁnding is particu-
larly germane to the case of music, where imaginative episodes
unfold dynamically as people listen. Just as participants in the
Perky experiment imagined objects that followed the contours
of barely visible projections, there are indications that the con-
tent of the imagined stories triggered by listening to instrumen-
tal music relate nonarbitrarily to the acoustic features of the
music (10–12). T o date, however, to the best of our knowledge,
no rigorous large-scale study has focused speciﬁcally on the con-
tent of stories imagined in response to instrumental music in a
manner that affords a consideration of the way both musical
excerpts and culture shape shared narrative imaginings.
A related body of work has empirically examined questions
around music’s semantic dimensions but understood in a more
constrained way. Brief clips of music have been shown to elicit
the N400 ERP component associated with semantic priming for
target words that are semantically related versus semantically
unrelated to that clip—for example, the word “narrow” after a
clip featuring pitches close together within a small range, or the
word “basement” after a clip featuring low pitches; behaviorally,
participants were able to mark which of two choices was the
related target word (13). Even single chords were able to elicit
N400s for semantically incongruent words (e.g., hate for a con-
sonant chord, love for a dissonant ones) but only in participants
with formal musical training (14). A functional MRI study using
the same paradigm suggested that for musically trained partici-
pants, individual chords “may activate affective representations,
which spread onto affectively related lexical representations”
(ref. 15, p. 93). In other work, single tones with different timbres
have been similarly shown to elicit N400s for incongruent words,
such as “tense” or “open” (16). All of these studies reveal stable
semantic associations to tones, chords, or brief clips within
deﬁned subgroups (e.g., musicians in a single geographic loca-
tion), as assessed by binary-choice designs.
The present study goes beyond the work of Koelsch and col-
leagues in important ways. Here, we use an unconstrained task
consisting of free-response descriptions to study relationships
among spontaneously imagined narratives sustained while listen-
ing to longer 1-min musical excerpts (rather than brief clips).
While previous empirical work on musical semantics provides
tantalizing clues about lower-level mechanisms that may relate
to the process of formulating full-ﬂedged, unconstrained imagin-
ings, nothing in that previous body of work provides evidence
that shared imaginings might exist at the level of full stories to
musical excerpts that extend beyond a few seconds under free-
response (rather than binary choice) conditions, nor does any-
thing in that previous body of work make use of narrative data
collected at multiple geographic sites providing both within- and
between-culture comparisons in order to identify the scope of
any intersubjectivity.
The basis for the current study was an initial cross-cultural
investigation by our team that focused on survey responses
about listeners’ narrative perceptions (3). In this study, we com-
pared quantitative measures of narrativity (the likelihood that
an excerpt of music triggers a story in listeners minds) and nar-
rative engagement (how vivid and clear the events of the story
are in listeners minds) for a large set of musical excerpts from
Western and Chinese musical traditions for listeners in the
same three distinct geographical locations as the present inves-
tigation—two suburban college towns in the US Midwest and
one rural village in the Chinese province of Guizhou. Results
showed that people in all three locations readily narrativize to
excerpts (i.e., narrativity scores were quite high) with varying
levels of narrative engagement for both Western and Chinese
instrumental music; moreover, people do so with about the
same degree regardless of location. Notably, however, although
both excerpt narrativity and narrative engagement scores were
highly correlated across the two US locations, they were not cor-
related (not predictive) for cross-cultural comparisons between
listeners in both of the US locations and the remote rural village
in Guizhou.
An obvious limitation of Margulis et al. (3) is that quantita-
tive measures of narrativity and narrative engagement alone do
not probe the content of the imagined stories. The central
question raised here is whether or not listeners have shared
narrative imaginings. Exploring imagined stories in an uncon-
strained manner—by simply prompting participants to provide
free-response descriptions—is essential to ascertaining whether
reliable intersubjectivity exists and affords the opportunity to
begin to answer a number of provocative questions. Under con-
ditions where a listener is free to describe the subjective con-
tents of their musical imaginings, will their responses diverge in
a way that reﬂects the true idiosyncrasy and interpersonally var-
iable nature of music listening? More generally, what do the
accounts of the imagined stories themselves reveal about the
extent to which narrative imaginings are “guided” by the music
(17, 18) or the extent to which they constitute more arbitrary
episodes of mind wandering? T o what extent are the stories gen-
erated in response to speciﬁc musical excerpts shared among
individuals within and across cultures? Moreover, how does the
capacity of musical features to shape imagined stories intersect
with the set of prior experiences and dispositions that any indi-
vidual listener brings to the story imagining task?
These questions lie at the heart of music’s capacity to con-
nect and divide people and groups—while listening to a partic-
ular excerpt, two people might imagine the same story or wildly
divergent stories. The relationship between those imaginings
can render that music an agent of shared experience or the
opposite, with ramiﬁcations for music’s potential role in social
bonding, postulated to be a fundamental purpose of music and
the explanation for its evolutionary origins (19). These ques-
tions also have clinical relevance since the Bonny Method of
Guided Imagery and Music is one of the most commonly used
musical therapies, applied to a variety of conditions including
post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, cancer rehabilita-
tion, and recovery after cardiothoracic surgery (20–23).
T o tackle these questions head on, 622 participants in the
same three geographical locations as Margulis et al. (3) provided
free-response descriptions of the stories imagined when listening
to excerpts of instrumental music. T wo of the locations were sub-
urban college towns in middle America (one in Arkansas and
the other in Michigan). The story responses of these two groups
were compared to each other (a within-culture comparison) and
to the stories generated by participants in a different geographical
location that was culturally distinct—a village in rural China (the
Dimen group) where participants speak Dong, a tone language
that is not related to Mandarin (ref. 24, p. 230), and where partici-
pants have little access to the Western media that might be
expected to inﬂuence responses. All three groups of listeners
(Arkansas, Michigan, Dimen) heard the same 32 musical stimuli.
Half the stimuli were excerpts of instrumental Western art music
without words and half were excerpts of instrumental Chinese art
music without words—parallel in the sense that although West-
ern art music did not form a part of the US participants’ daily
intentional listening habits, it was broadly familiar as a genre,
just as Chinese art music did not form a part of the Dimen
2o f1 1 j PNAS Margulis et al.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
participants’ daily intentional listening habits but was broadly
familiar as a genre.
If stimulus features exclusively drive the content of the imag-
ined narratives—if stories are directly and universally implied by
music—then narratives provided to individual excerpts should be
highly similar across all three locations, and stories provided to
excerpts from each music tradition (Western or Chinese) should
be somewhat similar across locations. If differences at the level
of individuals are the primary drivers of the content of the imag-
ined stories—e.g., listeners imagine arbitrary stories unrelated to
the musical excerpts themselves—then similarity among responses
to individual excerpts across locations, or among responses to
excerpts from a particular music tradition (Western or Chinese),
should be no greater than the similarity of responses to different
excerpts from different music traditions.
If differences at the level of culture are the primary drivers
of the content of the imagined stories, then responses should
be similar between Arkansas and Michigan participants over-
all but not within individual excerpts and not within music
traditions; this would suggest that people who share a culture
(broadly construed) tend to imagine similar stories, but these
stories are not driven in consistent ways by the musical excerpts.
If, however, stimulus features combine with differences at the
level of culture to shape the content of imagined narratives, then
responses to individual excerpts (and, to a lesser extent, excerpt
types) should be highly similar between Arkansas and Michigan
participants but not between Arkansas and Dimen participants
or between Michigan and Dimen participants.
In order to compare stories collected at different geographic
locations, we examined text similarity using collections of narra-
tives evoked by the same music excerpt. For each location
(Arkansas, Michigan, or Dimen), narratives provided in response
t ot h es a m em u s i ce x c e r p tw e r ec o m b i n e di n t oas i n g l en a r r a t i v e
document or “nardoc” ( SI Appendix,T a b l eS 1). Thus, while each
document comprises a variety of individual narratives, as a whole,
a document represents the narrative themes typically experi-
enced when listening to a music excerpt. Analysis occurred at
the level of nardocs for music excerpts rather than responses
from individual participants, which allowed us to examine the
applicability of Kassabian’s (25) concept of “distributed subjecti-
vity”—commonalities that might emerge among participants in
response to particular excerpts—rather than focusing on the dif-
ferences that might exist between individuals. T o ascertain
whether individual excerpts of music reliably drive distinct narra-
tive imaginings, the semantic similarity of nardocs was compared
within and across locations. Similarity was ﬁrst assessed by visu-
alizing relative nardoc locations in a predeﬁned semantic space
followed by a more rigorous assessment of shared semantic con-
tent using a permutation-based approach.
Results
Visualization of Semantic Similarity of Imagined Narratives. We
visualized the semantic relationships between narrative docu-
ments (nardocs) by projecting text into a pretrained embedding
space and reducing dimensionality prior to plotting the results.
We used a word2vec model pretrained on the Google News data-
set ( https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/)a sam e a n st o
obtain feature vectors for words that reﬂect semantic similarities
based on a large corpus of ∼3 million words and phrases rather
than relying on the collection of nardocs used in the present
study (Methods). Fig. 1 shows the average location in the embed-
ding space for narrative documents for each of the 32 excerpts by
the listeners in Arkansas, Michigan, and Dimen. The closer
two nardocs are in the embedding space, the greater their
semantic similarity, but the two dimensions of the embedding space
do not themselves have a meaningful interpretation ( Methods).
Dimen listeners’ story responses cluster together in a region of
the semantic space that is distinct from that occupied by the imag-
ined stories of the Arkansas and Michigan listeners. Furthermore,
within each geographical location, responses to music from a
particular music tradition (Western or Chinese) largely cluster
together. These clusters by music tradition seem to overlap for
Arkansas and Michigan participants but not for Arkansas and
Dimen or Michigan and Dimen participants. In other words,
Arkansas and Michigan stories imagined in response to Western
music seem to be similar and Arkansas and Michigan stories
imagined in response to Chinese music seem to be similar, but
neither of these seem similar to the stories imagined by Dimen
participants to these kinds of excerpts.
If imagined stories constituted arbitrary episodes of mind wan-
dering, then such consistent patterns around music tradition and
geographic location should not emerge. Moreover, if the imag-
ined stories were arbitrary and idiosyncratic, clustering should
not occur around responses to individual excerpts. Instead,
responses to individual excerpts between participants at two geo-
graphically distinct, but culturally similar sites—Arkansas and
Michigan—appear to be highly similar, clustering so closely
together in several cases (for excerpts W2, W9, C13, and C16, for
example) that the points representing their position in semantic
space nearly or entirely overlap. This pattern does not emerge
between Arkansas and Dimen stories imagined in response to
individual excerpts or between Michigan and Dimen stories. We
next examine these trends.
Comparison of Narrative Similarity within and across Music Tradition
for Each Geographic Location. For all quantitative comparisons,
narrative documents were preprocessed and transformed into a
feature vector. Each feature corresponded to the term frequency-
inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) score of a word (26). This
TF-IDF score measures a word’s importance within a particular
text document by multiplying its frequency in that document
Fig. 1. Visualization of narrative documents (nardocs) in semantic space.
Each symbol represents the average position of a nardoc projected into the
predeﬁned embedding space. The proximity of two nardocs in embedding
space corresponds to the extent of shared semantic content (i.e., points
for nardocs that are closer together represent greater semantic similar-
ity). Individual excerpt labels are represented by W or C for music tradi-
tion (Western or Chinese) followed by the excerpt number (1 to 16 for
each). Locations are labeled by a larger letter (A = Arkansas, M = Michigan,
D = Dimen).
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Margulis et al.
Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
PNAS j 3o f1 1
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119
by the inverse frequency of the word across all documents.
Thus, a high TF-IDF score indicates that a word is uniquely
relevant to a particular nardoc and a vector of TF-IDF scores
reﬂects the unique composition of words in a nardoc.
If overarching music style characteristics constrain the narra-
tives that listeners hear in the music, then for each group of lis-
teners (Arkansas, Michigan, and Dimen), stories generated in
response to musical excerpts from a particular music tradition
should be more similar to each other than to stories generated in
response to excerpts from a different music tradition. T o test this,
we measured the cosine similarities between nardoc feature vec-
tors generated in response to excerpts from within the same
music tradition (e.g., Western tradition or Chinese tradition) and
compared these to the cosine similarities between nardocs fea-
ture vectors generated in response to excerpts across music tradi-
tions. Cosine similarity expresses the cosine of the angle between
the two to-be-compared feature vectors, which varies between 0
and 1. A value of 1 indicates an angle of 0 ° between the two vec-
tors (maximum similarity) while a value of 0 indicates that the
two vectors are at 90° (minimum similarity).
For each geographic location, we used Welch’s t test to com-
pare the different-excerpt cosine similarity distributions within
and across music traditions, deriving one-tailed difference
thresholds (>95th percentile of null) for each comparison by per-
muting the excerpt labels of participants’ narratives at each loca-
tion prior to combining them into nardocs ( Different-Excerpt
Comparisons). The results, summarized in Fig. 2 and reported as
follows, show that the overarching music style characteristics par-
ticular to a music tradition (Western vs. Chinese) constrain the
narratives that listeners hear in the music in all three geographical
locations (Arkansas, Michigan, and Dimen); supporting descrip-
tive statistics are provided inSI Appendix,T a b l eS 2.
Arkansas. The leftmost three bars of Fig. 2 show that the simi-
larity between nardocs generated by the Arkansas listeners in
response to excerpts within the Western tradition and within
the Chinese tradition was greater than the similarity between
nardocs generated in response to excerpts across traditions
(Western-Western vs. Chinese-Western: t = 8.70, difference
threshold,t = 3.68; Chinese-Chinese vs. Chinese-Western:t = 9.92.
difference threshold, t = 2.61). Moreover, the similarity between
Western tradition nardocs was not signiﬁcantly different from the
similarity between Chinese tradition nardocs (t = 0.37; difference
threshold,t = 6.12).
Michigan. The middle three bars of Fig. 2 show that the similarity
between nardocs generated by the Michigan listeners in response
to excerpts within the Western tradition and within the Chinese
tradition was greater than it was between nardocs generated
in response to excerpts across traditions (Western-Western
vs. Chinese-Western: t = 11.65, difference threshold, t = 6.71;
Chinese-Chinese vs. Chinese-Western:t = 7.78, difference thresh-
old, t = 0.01). Moreover, as found with the Arkansas listeners,
the similarity between Western tradition nardocs was not signiﬁ-
cantly different from the similarity between Chinese tradition
nardocs (t = 3.70; difference threshold,t = 10.50).
Dimen. The rightmost three bars of Fig. 2 show that the similarity
between nardocs generated by the Dimen listeners in response to
excerpts within the Western tradition and within the Chinese tra-
dition was greater than the similarity between nardocs generated
in response to excerpts across traditions (Western-Western
vs. Chinese-Western: t = 2.88, difference threshold, t = 1.75;
Chinese-Chinese vs. Chinese-Western:t = 7.73, difference thresh-
old, t = 5.24). Moreover, as found with the two US samples, the
similarity between Western tradition nardocs was not signiﬁcantly
different from the similarity between Chinese tradition nardocs
(t = /C0 3.58; difference threshold, t = /C0 8.27).
Comparison of Narrative Similarity within/between Music Traditions
across Geographic Locations. Given that music style characteris-
tics constrain narratives within a location (i.e., a distinct set of
stories emerges in relation to excerpts from the Western music
tradition and the Chinese music tradition, respectively, regardless
of geographic location), the next natural question is whether sto-
ries generated in response to a particular music tradition share
characteristics across locations. T o address this question, similar-
ity was compared between nardocs prompted by excerpts within
the same music tradition (Western or Chinese) across pairs of
locations (Arkansas-Michigan, Arkansas-Dimen, and Michigan-
Dimen). For example, for the Arkansas-Michigan comparison of
the stories prompted by music excerpts from the Western tradi-
tion, we calculated the pairwise similarity between all Western
tradition nardocs generated by Arkansas listeners and all West-
ern tradition nardocs generated by Michigan listeners, excluding
the 32 same-excerpt comparisons. We then compared the cross-
location Western-Western and Chinese-Chinese distributions to
the distribution of pairwise similarities between all nardocs gener-
ated in response to the two different music traditions at the
two locations.
For each cross-location comparison (Arkansas-Michigan,
Arkansas-Dimen, Michigan-Dimen), we used Welch’s t test to
compare the different-excerpt cosine similarity distributions
within and between music traditions, deriving difference thresh-
olds (>95th percentile of the null distribution) for each compari-
son by permuting the excerpt labels of participants’ narratives at
each location prior to combining them into nardocs ( Different-
Excerpt Comparisons).
The results, summarized in Fig. 3 and reported as follows,
show that narratives generated by Arkansas and Michigan listen-
ers were similarly inﬂuenced by the overarching music style
Fig. 2. Comparison of stories prompted by different music excerpts at the
same geographic location. For each of the 32 excerpts, we calculated the
pairwise cosine similarities between the TF-IDF vectors for narrative docu-
ments collected from the same geographic location. We excluded same-
excerpt comparisons and instead examined different-excerpt similarity based
on the music tradition an excerpt belongs to. The nine box-and-whisker
plots depict the median value and quantiles of the distribution of different-
excerpt similarity values in each comparison within geographic locations. For
each geographic location, we used Welch ’s t test to compare the different-
excerpt similarity distributions within and between music traditions. Individ-
ual data points (diamonds) correspond to document similarity values that
exceed 1.5× the IQR. Black lines spanning two distributions at the top of the
ﬁgure represent signi ﬁcant t tests relative to the permuted difference
thresholds. The long solid and dotted lines depict the 95th percentile and
median value of the control narrative distributions and represent estimates
of the maximum and average similarity expected between unprompted sto-
ries by US college undergraduates, respectively. The values serve as an addi-
tional reference point and not as a threshold for signi ﬁcance.
4o f1 1 j PNAS Margulis et al.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
characteristics particular to a music tradition. However, the
results for cross-culture comparisons at different locations
(Arkansas-Dimen and Michigan-Dimen) revealed little common-
ality across cultures in the types of stories that listeners generated
in response to excerpts from either the Western or Chinese music
tradition; supporting descriptive statistics are provided in SI
Appendix,T a b l eS 3.
Arkansas-Michigan comparison. The leftmost three bars of Fig. 3
show that similarity was signiﬁcantly greater between Arkan-
sas and Michigan nardocs of the same music tradition than
between Arkansas and Michigan nardocs of different music
traditions (e.g., Western/Chinese or Chinese/Western; Western/
Western, t = 14.71, difference threshold, t = 5.88; Chinese/
Chinese,t = 12.89, difference threshold,t = 0.32). The comparison
across locations also revealed no overall difference in similarity
for nardocs generated in response to excerpts within the Chinese
tradition and excerpts within the Western tradition ( t = 3.08;
difference threshold, t = 9.84), conﬁrming that shared stories
can emerge in response to music from both more and less
familiar styles.
Arkansas-Dimen and Michigan-Dimen comparisons. Overall, the
pattern of results between geographically distinct locations was
different when the two locations did not share an overarching
culture. Both between-culture comparisons, shown in the middle
three and rightmost three bars of Fig. 3, respectively, revealed
no overall difference in similarity for nardocs generated in
response to excerpts within the Chinese tradition and excerpts
within the Western tradition (Arkansas-Dimen: t = 3.37, differ-
ence threshold, t = 4.10; Michigan-Dimen: t = 3.26, difference
threshold, t = 6.61). However, when music tradition is consid-
ered separately, the similarity of nardocs generated in response
to excerpts from the Western tradition, but not the Chinese tra-
dition, was greater than the similarity of nardocs generated in
response to excerpts from across music traditions for both the
Arkansas-Dimen comparison (Western: t = 4.95, difference
threshold,t = 2.37; Chinese:t = 1.63, difference threshold,t = 4.23)
and the Michigan-Dimen comparison (Western: t = 5.52; differ-
ence threshold, t = 3.96; Chinese: t = 1.76; difference threshold,
t = 2.47). T aken together, these results suggest that Chinese
music prompts more different associations across cultures than
the Western music, likely because of the greater prevalence of
Western music in globalized contexts such as mass media.
Comparison of Narrative Similarity for the Same Excerpts across
Geographic Locations. The preceding two sections show that the
broad category of music tradition constrains patterns of narra-
tive response within and across geographic locations, but how
closely do stimulus features drive imagined narratives? If the
stimulus features of individual musical excerpts shape narra-
tives across listeners in different geographic locations more
directly, then even narratives prompted by the same excerpt
should be similar across geographic locations, especially for
locations with a shared culture. T o address this hypothesis, we
examined the percentage of same-excerpt nardoc comparisons
that demonstrated signiﬁcant cosine similarity values for each
location pair (Arkansas-Michigan, Arkansas-Dimen, Michigan-
Dimen). We derived two separate thresholds for signiﬁcance: the
maximum similarity expected by chance between stories prompted
by the 32 different music excerpts used in the study (same-sample
threshold; Excerpt Label Permutations ) and the maximum simi-
larity expected between stories by US college undergraduates
promoted by a generic task cue (control-sample threshold; Con-
trol Narrative Permutations ). The results are shown in Fig. 4
a n dr e p o r t e da sf o l l o w s .
Arkansas-Michigan comparison. Overall, the majority of excerpts
prompted similar narratives in participants from Arkansas and
Michigan. The median cosine similarity for nardocs produced in
response to the same excerpts across locations was 0.357 (inter-
quartile range [IQR] = 0.325 to 0.417). A total of 65.6% of
excerpts (21 out of 32) prompted nardocs from Arkansas listen-
ers that were more similar to the nardocs generated for that
excerpt by Michigan listeners than expected by chance based on
the same-sample threshold (cosine similarity = 0.346). A total
of 84.4% of excerpts (27 out of 32) prompted nardocs from
Arkansas listeners that were more similar to nardocs generated
for that excerpt by Michigan listeners than expected by chance
based on the control-sample threshold (cosine similarity =
0.309). The ﬁnding suggests that same-culture listeners are likely
to experience similar narratives when listening to the same piece
of music.
Arkansas-Dimen and Michigan-Dimen comparisons. Overall, the
majority of excerpts prompted much less similar narratives in
participants from Arkansas and Dimen and from Michigan and
Dimen. The median cosine similarity for nardocs produced in
response to the same excerpts across locations was only 0.169
(IQR = 0.149 to 0.191) for the Arkansas-Dimen comparison and
0.153 (IQR = 0.130 to 0.169) for the Michigan-Dimen compari-
son. Moreover, only a single excerpt (1 out of 32) prompted nar-
ratives in either Arkansas or Michigan listeners more similar to
Dimen listeners than expected by chance based on the control-
sample threshold (cosine similarity = 0.309), and only a single
excerpt (1 out of 32) for the Arkansas sample and only 6.3% of
excerpts (2 out of 32) for the Michigan sample prompted narra-
tives more similar than expected to Dimen listeners based on the
same-sample threshold (cosine similarity = 0.244); potential
effects of age across locations are considered in SI Appendix, SI
Results and T able S4. Overall, these results suggest music can
evoke similar narratives in different individuals, but only if those
Fig. 3. Comparison of stories prompted by different music excerpts at dif-
ferent geographic locations. For each of the 32 excerpts, we calculated the
pairwise cosine similarities between the TF-IDF vectors for narrative docu-
ments collected at each geographic location. We excluded same-excerpt
comparisons and instead examined different-excerpt similarity based on the
music tradition an excerpt belongs to. The nine box-and-whisker plots depict
the median value and quantiles of the distribution of different-excerpt simi-
larity values in each comparison between geographic locations. Individual
data points (diamonds) correspond to document similarity values that exceed
1.5× the IQR. For each location comparison, we used Welch ’s t test to com-
pare the different-excerpt similarity distributions within and between music
traditions. Black lines spanning two distributions at the top of the ﬁgure
represent signiﬁcant t tests relative to the permuted difference thresholds.
The long solid and dotted lines depict the 95th percentile and median value
of the control narrative distributions and represent estimates of the maxi-
mum and average similarity expected between unprompted stories by US
college undergraduates, respectively. The values serve as an additional refer-
ence point and not as a threshold for signi ﬁcance.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Margulis et al.
Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
PNAS j 5o f1 1
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119
individuals have overlapping life experiences, stemming from (for
example) a shared culture.
Discussion
Results show that people spontaneously generate similar stories
to instrumental excerpts across geographic locations that share
a culture (Arkansas-Michigan); these shared imaginings do not
convey across cultural boundaries (Arkansas-Dimen and Michigan-
Dimen). Narrative imaginings, which are usually silent and invisi-
ble, also appear to be phenomenologically distinct and reportable,
revealing shared experiences of music among listeners with
shared cultural backgrounds. Given that these imaginings can
feel highly subjective and personal, the realization that aspects
of them are shared underscores music’s role in social bonding,
hypothesized as a key driver of natural selection for musical
capacities (19). The clear within-excerpt similarity of free responses
from listeners at two geographically distinct, culturally similar
research sites in the United States reveals that the narrative
imaginings people sustain while listening to music are reliably
driven by characteristics of the music itself. Y et the fact that this
relationship between excerpt and narrative response only holds
within but not across cultures reveals that the broadly shared
pool of experiences that constitute a culture also plays a forma-
tive role in determining the content of music-evoked stories.
Thus, any individual story imagined in response to music bears
the imprint of both the sounds that triggered it and the prior
experiences the listener brings to the encounter. Imagined sto-
ries can connect listeners with similar cultural experiences as
much as they can divide listeners with different ones, an impor-
tant corrective to the assumption that music necessarily aids
intercultural understanding.
For example, Fig. 5 shows the words most representative of
the narratives generated in response to a sample Chinese
excerpt (C16) and a sample Western excerpt (W9). While
listening to excerpt W9, participants in Arkansas and Michigan
tended to imagine a sunrise over a forest, with woodland crea-
tures awaking and birds chirping; participants in Dimen tended
to imagine a man blowing a leaf on the top of a mountain,
romantically wooing his beloved. While listening to C16, par-
ticipants in Arkansas and Michigan imagined an old cowboy
sitting alone in the scorching desert sun looking out over an
empty town; participants in Dimen imagined a man in ancient
times sorrowfully contemplating the loss of his beloved. It is
striking that individual excerpts prompt such consistently similar
imagined stories from participants in Arkansas and Michigan
yet equally clear that this similarity does not extend to stories
imagined by Dimen participants.
The Western excerpts drew from a musical tradition that fea-
tures heavily in Western mass media (25). The majority of Dimen
participants (63%) reported no exposure to Western media, but
some (37%) did report exposure—albeit quite minimal. Although
the extent of shared exposure to Western mass media was not
sufﬁcient to bring imagined stories in response to individual
music excerpts into alignment between the Dimen participants
and the Arkansas and Michigan participants, it likely drove the
signiﬁcant difference between the similarity of imagined stories
to any one of the Western excerpts to any of the other Western
excerpts across all geographic location pairings (not only
Arkansas-Michigan but also Arkansas-Dimen and Michigan-
Dimen) compared to the similarity of imagined stories to any
one of the Western excerpts compared to any one of the Chinese
excerpts across these same geographic location pairings. That is,
even across cultures, the general kind of story that Western
excerpts were understood to imply seemed to be at least some-
what shared, likely due to experience (however slight) with
Western mass media (this issue is given additional consider-
ation in SI Appendix , SI Results ).
Furthermore, within each geographic location, stories imag-
ined in response to two excerpts from any one musical tradition
(Western or Chinese) tended to be more similar than stories
imagined to two excerpts from different musical traditions. This
increased similarity in imagined narratives for excerpts from
particular musical traditions constitutes additional evidence
that stories imagined while listening to music are signiﬁcantly
driven at least in part by characteristics of the sound itself (in
this case, whether the excerpt stemmed from a Western or
Chinese art music tradition). This interpretation is bolstered
by the ﬁnding that participants could identify which of two stories
was the one typically provided by other participants who shared a
culture but not which of two stories was the one typically pro-
vided by participants who did not share a culture (5).
There are a number of outstanding questions related to the
relative roles of exposure to Western and Chinese mass media
in the different geographic locations. Whether the robust
within-culture shared associations were gleaned from media or
other kinds of cultural experiences, it is still a striking phenom-
enon. Since we have good reason to believe that the speciﬁc
excerpts in the study were not used in widely seen media con-
texts, the convergence in imagined stories—if inﬂuenced by
media—would have to reﬂect abstraction away from the indi-
vidual excerpts to their underlying patterns or attributes, which
would then be matched with stored templates that have been
abstracted from experience with speciﬁc media contexts. This
would amount to an internalized musical taxonomy for listening
of great potential interest to musicology, cognitive science, and
media studies. Arkansas and Michigan participant responses to
Chinese excerpts are particularly illustrative of this process.
Although it is highly unlikely that Arkansas and Michigan partic-
ipants encountered the Chinese excerpts in mass market movies,
they nevertheless experienced broadly similar imaginings, hear-
ing them in terms of other more familiar sound-sequence pair-
ings—for example, a lonely cowboy scene. Despite the fact that
Fig. 4. Comparison of stories prompted by the same music excerpt at dif-
ferent geographic locations. For each of the 32 excerpts, we calculated the
cosine similarities between the corresponding TF-IDF vectors for narrative
documents collected at each geographic location. The three box-and-whis-
ker plots depict the median value and quantiles of the distribution of
same-excerpt similarity values in each comparison between geographic
locations. Individual data points (diamonds) correspond to document simi-
larity values that exceed 1.5 × the IQR. The values of the solid lines repre-
sent particularly conservative estimates of document similarities corrected
for multiple comparisons (short lines = same-sample thresholds; long line =
control-sample threshold). The long dotted line corresponds to the median
value of the Princeton-Michigan permuted distribution and represents an
estimate of the average similarity expected between unprompted stories by
US college undergraduates. The long dotted line serves as an additional ref-
erence point and not as a threshold for signi ﬁcance.
6o f1 1 j PNAS Margulis et al.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
they had almost certainly never heard an excerpt of Chinese art
music accompany a cowboy movie, one potential mechanism
subserving the shared narrative imagery for this excerpt involves
cueing into similarities between the excerpt’s acoustic features
and music that Arkansas and Michigan participants had heard in
movies about the “Old West.” An important topic for future
research is studying how these mappings develop and function.
Overall, this study’s ﬁndings suggest that music-evoked narra-
tives are both nonarbitrary and nonuniversal. The discipline of
ethnomusicology has long argued for the cultural contingency of
most aspects of music making and understanding, but that mes-
sage is frequently bypassed by scientiﬁc research (for thorough
critiques of scientiﬁc accounts of music and universality, see
refs. 27 and 28). By demonstrating the malleability of perceived
musical meaning using empirical tools, this study provides a
path forward for complex cross-cultural scientiﬁc work about
music and its communicative potential. The stories we imagine
while listening might reveal more about our shared or divergent
previous experiences than we would expect. The stories people
imagine while listening to instrumental music are fundamental
to its aesthetic valuation (29) and to its emotional power (30).
Imagination aids transportation, the process whereby an aes-
thetic stimulus grips the listener, carrying them out of their
everyday world and giving them a sense that they have entered
the universe of the piece (31), a process that is critical to peak
experiences of music (32).
In a broader context, these results provide what is akin to a
contemporary version of the Perky experiment from 1910. Peo-
ple imagine stories while listening to music that may seem
highly subjective and personal but which in fact follow the con-
tours of the music’s acoustic features and of the shared cultural
resonances that have accrued around them. This speaks to a
broader blend between the more idiosyncratic aspects of any
individual’s imagination and the shared group-level determiners
of any individual’s private imagining. A key next question would
be if people experience shared narrative imagining to musical
prompts, would they experience similar levels of commonality
among imaginings produced by other types of prompts, or is
there something special about music? This debate recalls argu-
ments around whether music triggers autobiographical memo-
ries more frequently and vividly than other prompts (33, 34).
Given the empirical similarity between imagined third-person
narratives and recalled ﬁrst-person episodic memories, these
two lines of research considered in parallel can shed new light
on how music shapes the imagination (see ref. 2). One way that
music might be uniquely capable of engendering particularly
vivid and dynamic imagined scenes—whether episodes of auto-
biographical memory or ﬁctional stories—is that it features a
series of time-ﬂuctuating characteristics such that changes can
dynamically guide and support the contents of the imagination.
Another important topic for future research concerns the
relationship between imagined stories and emotional responses
to music (see ref. 21). It has been suggested that some aspects
of emotional response to music are shared across cultures
(35–37), yet we ﬁnd here that similarities in the semantic con-
tent of narrative imaginings do not seem to extend across cul-
tures. T o consider whether, in the present study, similarity in
the general sentiment of the narratives might extend across cul-
tures, even if the concrete imaginings do not, we had a set of
independent judges rate the sentiment (negative to positive) of
each of the produced narratives by each participant in all three
locations and then examined the correlation of sentiment across
pairs of locations (details in SI Appendix , SI Results ). We ﬁnd
that, similar to the semantic similarity results, the Western music
excerpts trigger shared sentiment for the within-culture compari-
son but not for the two between-culture comparisons (Arkansas-
Dimen, Michigan-Dimen). The Chinese excerpts also lead to
shared sentiment for the within-culture comparison but also lead
to shared sentiment for the two between-culture comparisons,
suggesting that commonalties in valence can arise independently
of commonalities in concrete semantics. It is difﬁcult to make
robust inferences from these supplemental sentiment results
since most of the stories were neutral, neither positively nor neg-
atively valenced. Stories tended to feature objects, actions, and
settings that themselves may have had inspired varied emotional
response, depending on the background and perspective of the
participant, but the story descriptions simply recounted the story,
not the participant’s reaction to the story. Future research should
expressly assess both narrative imaginings and emotional
response to understand the extent to which there are cross-
cultural similarities in affective experience when the correspond-
ing concrete semantic imaginings diverge.
Another outstanding question for future work is the degree to
which listeners’ imagined stories constitute an available response
Arkansas C16 Michigan C16 Dimen C16
Arkansas W9 Michigan W9 Dimen W9 
Fig. 5. Word clouds of nardocs generated in response to a Chinese excerpt (C16) and a Western excerpt (W9). Each cloud depicts the words with the top
30 TF-IDF scores in a nardoc. The size of a word corresponds to the magnitude of its score.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Margulis et al.
Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
PNAS j 7o f1 1
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119
to instrumental music that participants can call upon when asked
versus a pervasive response that participants employ in everyday
listening contexts. Earlier work from this project shows that lis-
teners readily imagine narratives in response to instrumental
music, do so with relative ease, and tend to enjoy excerpts more
when they are more narratively engaged (3). While this suggests
that imagining narratives is a broadly accessible and enjoyable
form of relating to music that may constitute a pervasive response,
there are not yet direct data that address how frequently narrative
listening occurs under naturalistic conditions. Thus, this study
demonstrates that intersubjective imaginings are an available
response—shared semantic resonances are at hand should a lis-
tener choose to attend to them—but the extent to which listeners
do or do not employ this response in everyday situations requires
additional investigation.
One potential approach to this issue would be to consider
implicit tasks to measure narrative engagement without cueing
participants about the possibility of hearing a story. If people
regularly use narrative frameworks to understand instrumental
music, then these imagined narratives may play an important
mediating role in emotional experiences of music (21). This
could potentially explain why Cowen et al. (38) found that
highly speciﬁc concrete feelings in response to musical excerpts,
such as “triumphant” or “dreamy,” were preponderant and bet-
ter preserved across individuals then levels of valence and
arousal more broadly—if feeling labels had been mediated by
speciﬁc imagined dramatic situations, it might have been easier
to overlay speciﬁc labels on them rather than more abstract
dimensions like valence or arousal. Indeed, the presence of
intersubjectivity around concrete stories imagined in response
to music within, but not across, cultures provides a potential
scaffold for the kind of complex, differentiated affective experi-
ences beyond mere positive or negative valence that make
music such a rich communicative domain.
Finally, at the broadest level, the present research under-
scores the fact that music is anything but an “abstract stimulus,”
as it is often called in the research literature (39–41). Rather, it
conveys concrete imaginings that can be broadly shared among
listeners but fail to transmit across cultural boundaries, making
music a potential driver both of mutual understanding and
social bonding but also of division and distancing. Given the
possible therapeutic uses of musical imaginings (22), the discov-
ery that such imaginings are tied closely to acoustic features,
but with semantic content that is shared within, but not across,
cultures, could allow for the development of more precisely cal-
ibrated therapeutic tools.
Methods
Participants.
Arkansas group. Three-hundred eighteen individuals (n = 198, female), ages
17 to 30 y ( M = 19.0, SD = 1.6) enrolled in a psychology class participated in
the experiment individually at the Music Cognition Laboratory at the Univer-
sity of Arkansas in Fayetteville, AR, in exchange for partial course credit. A total
of 58% of participants reported no formal music training, de ﬁned as explicit
instruction in music of any sort; 42% reported 1 to 14 y of music training (M =
5.1, SD = 3.0). Over 98% of participants reported watching English-language
media (currently: M = 11.8 h/wk, SD = 12.9; as a child: M = 15.9 h/wk, SD =
14.0). In contrast, only 15% of participants reported ever having been exposed
to Chinese-language media. For those 15%, current exposure to Chinese-
language media was estimated to beM = 1.4 h/wk, SD = 2.5, while exposure as
a child was estimated to beM = 3.4 h/wk,SD = 4.4.
Dimen group. One-hundred forty-seven individuals (n = 126, female), ages
19 to 80 y (M = 46.6, SD = 14.5) from Dimen, China, participated in the experi-
ment individually at the Dimen Dong Community Cultural Research Center in
Dimen, Guizhou Province, China. A total of 70% of participants reported no
formal music training; 30% reported between 1 and 60 y of music training
(M = 14.5, SD = 14.4). Over 97% of participants reported watching Chinese-
language media (currently:M = 11.6 h/wk,SD = 8.9; as a child:M = 5.4 h/ wk,SD
= 7.9). In contrast, only 37% of participants reported ever having been exposed
to English-language media. For those 37%, current exposure to English-
language media was estimated to beM = 2.1 h/wk, SD = 3.5, while exposure as
a child was estimated to be M = 0.8 h/wk, SD =
3.2. Dimen listeners responded
in Dong and narratives were manually translated to English using the following
procedure. To minimize the possibility of systematic bias introduced by the
translation process, these responses were ﬁrst translated into Mandarin by
translators masked to the hypotheses of the study and masked to the iden-
tity of the stimulus prompting each response. The responses were then trans-
lated from Mandarin into English by a translator masked to the hypotheses
of the study and masked to the identity of the stimulus prompting each
response. At each stage, back translation was conducted to con-
ﬁrm accuracy.
Michigan group. The within-culture comparison group to the Arkansas sam-
ple consisted of 157 individuals ( n = 120, female), ages 18 to 31 y ( M = 19.2,
SD = 1.8) enrolled in a psychology class who participated in the experiment
individually at the Timing, Attention, and Perception Laboratory at Michigan
State University in East Lansing, MI, in exchange for partial course credit. A
total of 32% of participants reported no formal music training, while 68%
reported between 1 and 18 y of music training (M = 5.9, SD = 3.7).
The study was approved by the Survey and Behavioral Research Ethics Com-
mittee (SBREC) at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and by the Institu-
tional Review Board (IRB) at the University of Arkansas and Michigan State
University. At the Dimen site, informed consent was obtained as approved by
the Chinese University of Hong Kong SBREC. The contents of the consent form
were explained to participants in Mandarin. For participants who did not
speak Mandarin, the consent form was explained in Dong. Both the person
explaining the form in Mandarin and the person explaining it in Dong signed
the consent form as well as the participant. The participants who required
translation also usually did not know how to write. These participants wrote a
symbol (标记) on the consent form as their signature. All participants at the
Arkansas site signed informed consent, approved by the University of Arkan-
sas IRB. All participants at the Michigan site signed informed consent,
approved by the Michigan State University IRB.
Materials.
Stimuli. Stimuli, listed in SI Appendix,T a b l eS 5, were thirty-two 60-s excerpts
drawn from commercial recordings of instrumental music with no lyrics or
vocal part. Half of the 32 excerpts ( n = 16) were drawn from recordings of
Western art music and half (n = 16) from recordings of Chinese art music. The
selected excerpts were from a larger set of 128 excerpts for which we had nor-
mative data from all three geographical locations that enabled us to select
excerpts that were matched for enjoyment and low familiarity (3). Moreover,
preliminary pilot work determined that although participants in the Dimen
group were broadly familiar with the style of Chinese music presented in the
experiment and participants in the Arkansas and Michigan groups were
broadly familiar with the style of Western music presented in the experiment,
these styles of music were not the ones to which participants tended to listen
most frequently, and these speciﬁc excerpts were unlikely to be ones that par-
ticipants had heard prior to the experimental session (i.e., they were relatively
novel) nor was it likely that listeners had a priori explicit associations between
the selected excerpts and speci ﬁc ﬁlms and/or TV shows (see SI Appendix, SI
Methods for details of a media search for the selected excerpts).
Procedure. Once seated for the experiment, participants were instructed,
“You’ll be asked to report aspects of your experience listening to musical
excerpts, including whether or not you imagined a story while listening.
Please do NOT speci ﬁcally ATTEMPT to imagine a story. Simply listen to the
music as you ordinarily would. If you imagine a story, that ’s ﬁne, and if you
don’t imagine a story, that’s ﬁne too.
” Following these instructions, each par-
ticipant heard 1 of 4 subsets of 8 musical excerpts from the full set of 32 —4
Western and 4 Chinese. Subsets were rotated across participants so that
responses were obtained for all 32 excerpts, with approximately an equal
number of participants listening to each subset. Prior to the presentation of
each excerpt, participants were told they should try to listen attentively as if
they were intending to enjoy the piece. After listening to each excerpt, partici-
pants indicated whether they imagined a story or elements of a story while lis-
tening to the music (yes/no): the Story Response Question (SRQ). Next, they
answered a series of questions about their narrative engagement with the
excerpt, reported in McAuley et al. (4). After completing these items, partici-
pants responded to one of two free-response questions, depending on their
response to the SRQ. If they answered yes to the SRQ, they described the story
they imagined in as much detail as they were able. If they answered no to the
SRQ, they were asked to speculate about why they did not imagine a story.
Requesting free responses in both cases ensured that participants were not
8o f1 1 j PNAS Margulis et al.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
incentivized to select one option or the other simply on the basis of extent of
subsequent task demands.
Participants listened to the excerpts over high quality headphones with
the presentation order of the eight excerpts within the subset randomized.
Different listeners heard different subsets of 8 excerpts so that narrative
responses were obtained for all 32 excerpts across all participants. All par-
ticipants took part in the experiment via individual sessions. The entire
experiment took ∼50 min.
Statistical Analyses.
Data cleaning and preprocessing. All preprocessing and analyses were done
in Python version 3.6.2 (Python Software Foundation, https://www.python.
org/). First, we identiﬁed and manually corrected misspelled words. Narrative
texts were then stripped of all punctuation and capitalization, and English
stop-words from Natural Language Toolkit version 3.5 (42) were removed. In
order to focus our analysis on narrative content provided by participants, we
also removed words that referenced acoustic features of music excerpts (instru-
ment names from a list of instruments in a catalog of the world ’sm u s i c a l
instruments and music traditions, e.g., “Chinese” and “Western”) and words
that stemmed from task instructions (e.g., “imagine,”“ music,” and “story”);
see SI Appendix, Table S6 for the full list. Next, we used lemmatize() from the
Gensim package version 3.8.3 (43) to convert words to their dictionary forms so
that in ﬂected forms of words were treated as the same word. Finally, we
removed words that were only mentioned a single time across all nardocs, as
these words could not be used to assess the similarity of imagined content.
Narrative documents. For each geographic location, narratives provided in
response to the same music excerpt were combined into a single narrative
document (nardoc). Narrative documents were created for each of the 32
music excerpts heard at each of the three geographic locations (Arkansas,
Michigan, Dimen). Participants contributed no more than one narrative per
nardoc. Thus, while each document comprises a variety of individual narra-
tives, as a whole, a document represents the narrative themes typically experi-
enced by individuals at a particular geographic location when listening to a
particular music excerpt.
Feature vectors. Prior to calculating similarity, we used T ﬁdfVectorizer()
from the Scikit-learn package version 0.21.3 (44) with the default parameters
to transform each narrative document into a feature vector. All feature vec-
tors have the same length, which is determined by the size of the overall
vocabulary (i.e., the number of unique words across all documents), not the
number words in a nardoc. Each feature corresponded to the TF-IDF score of
a word (26) (details in SI Appendix, SI Methods). TF-IDF measures the impor-
tance of a word in a given narrative document by multiplying the frequency
of a word in the document by the inverse frequency of the word across all
documents. Thus, a high TF-IDF score suggests a word is uniquely relevant to
a particular document, and a vector of TF-IDF scores re ﬂects the unique com-
position of words in a document. The TF-IDF vectors were normalized using
the Euclidean norm to account for differences in document lengths, which
might arise due to differences in sample size; additional analyses that further
address sample size considerations are provided in SI Appendix, SI Results.
Cosine similarity. We used cosine_similarity() from the Scikit-learn to measure
the cosine of the angle between two nardoc feature vectors. Cosine similarity
is bounded between 0 and 1 where a value of 1 corresponds to an angle of 0°
between the two feature vectors (maximum similarity), while a value of 0 cor-
responds to an angle of 90° (minimum similarity). The greater the cosine simi-
larity between two feature vectors, the more similar the composition of the
corresponding narrative documents. The metric is commonly used alongside
TF-IDF in automated text analysis to ﬁnd related texts in large corpora, e.g.,
research articles (45), patient records (46), and Wikipedia articles (47). Note, in
this case, that measuring the cosine similarity between the Euclidean-normed
TF-IDF vectors produces the same result as the inner product of the vectors.
Same-excerpt comparisons. In order to test our hypothesis that stimulus fea-
tures shape music-evoked imagery, we compared narrative documents
prompted by the same music excerpts in geographically and or culturally dis-
tinct samples of participants. For each of the 32 excerpts, we calculated the
cosine similarities between the corresponding TF-IDF vectors for nardocs col-
lected at each geographic location. We grouped the similarities into separate
distributions for each of the three possible between geographic location com-
parisons (Michigan-Arkansas, Michigan-Dimen, and Arkansas-Dimen). Each
distribution comprised the 32 same-excerpt comparisons between two geo-
graphic locations. We used two separate permutation-based approaches to
assess the signi ﬁcance of same-excerpt similarity values against chance. One
method was based on excerpt label permutation and the second method
involved permutations of a set of control narratives generated by two control
groups (control group details in SI Appendix, SI Methods). Comparisons were
directional (one-tailed) because of interest was whether the observed value
was greater than 95% of the permuted values (“chance”).
Excerpt label permutations. The ﬁrst method to derive null ( “chance”) simi-
larity distributions for the same-excerpt comparisons used participants’ narra-
tives. Excerpt labels were permuted within each geographic location at the
level of individual participant stories prior to combining them into narrative
documents and comparing same-excerpt similarities as previously described.
Labels were randomized such that each participant contributed no more than
one narrative per nardoc. On each permutation, we extracted the maximum
cosine similarity value from the 32 same-excerpt comparisons between two
geographic locations. This process was repeated 2,000 times to create a null dis-
tribution for each of the three between geographic location comparisons. We
used null distributions of the maximum statistic to control the family-wise error
rate and correct for multiple comparisons (48). The 95th percentile of each null
distribution represents an estimate of the maximum similarity expected by
chance between nardocs prompted by the 32 different music excerpts used in
the study (same-sample threshold). We consider same-excerpt similarity values
g r e a t e rt h a n9 5 %o fap e r m u t e dn u l ld i s t r i b u t i o na ss i g n iﬁcant.
Control narrative permutations. The second method to derive null (chance)
similarity distributions used control narratives provided by separate samples
of participants from Princeton and the Michigan geographic locations ( SI
Appendix, SI Methods). Comparing control narratives provided an additional
threshold to assess the signi ﬁcance of same-excerpt similarities. Unlike the
narratives generated in response to music excerpts, the control narratives
were promoted by a generic task cue (participants wrote short story descrip-
tions during a 60-s silent period following a brief visual cue) and could not be
grouped into narrative documents based on a priori labels. As a result, we ran-
domly labeled each narrative provided by a participant as belonging to one of
eight possible control documents. Dividing the control narratives into eight
documents allowed us to best match the number of narratives in each control
document with the number of narratives in each nardoc (SI Appendix,T a b l eS 1).
Participants contributed no more than one narrative per document.
For each of the eight control documents, labels were randomly assigned to
the unpromoted control stories prior to combining them into documents. We
then measured the pairwise cosine similarities between the TF-IDF vectors for
control documents collected at Princeton and Michigan. We did this 1,000
times and created two null similarity distributions by extracting the maximum
and median cosine similarity values from all Princeton-Michigan comparisons
on each permutation. The 95th percentile of the maximum-based null distribu-
tion represents an estimate of the maximum similarity expected between
unprompted stories by US college undergraduates (control-sample threshold).
We consider same-excerpt similarity values greater than 95% of the permuted
null distribution as signiﬁcant. Of additional interest was the median value of
the null distribution, which served as an estimate of the similarity between ran-
dom, unprompted stories typically generated by US college undergraduates.
Different-excerpt comparisons. In order to test our hypothesis that stimulus
features drive music-evoked imagery, we also examined how the music tradi-
tion of an excerpt in ﬂuenced participants’ narratives. To do so, we compared
distributions of pairwise similarities between nardocs for different excerpts
rather than focusing on the similarity of same-excerpt nardoc pairs as
described previously. For each of the 32 excerpts, we calculated the pairwise
cosine similarities between the corresponding TF-IDF vectors for nardocs col-
lected at each geographic location. We excluded same-excerpt comparisons
and instead examined different-excerpt similarity based on the music tradition
of excerpts. For each geographic location comparison, we grouped similarities
into three separate distributions: narrative documents for Chinese music tradi-
tion excerpts, narrative documents for Western music tradition excerpts, and
narrative documents for excerpts of different music traditions (Chinese/West-
ern and Western/Chinese). Welch’s t test was used to compare the different-
excerpt cosine similarity distributions within and between music traditions for
each geographic location comparison. We used a permutation-based approach
to assess the signiﬁcance of thet tests.
We also ran the same analyses for the pairwise cosine similarities between
the corresponding TF-IDF vectors for nardocs collected at the same geo-
graphic location. For each geographic location, we grouped similarities into
three separate distributions: nardocs for Chinese music tradition excerpts,
nardocs for Western music tradition excerpts, and nardocs for excerpts of dif-
ferent music traditions (Chinese-Western and Western-Chinese). Welch ’s
t test was used to compare the different-excerpt cosine similarity distributions
within and between music traditions for each geographic location. We used a
permutation-based approach to assess the signiﬁcance of the t tests.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Margulis et al.
Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
PNAS j 9o f1 1
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119
Excerpt label permutations. We used participants’ narratives to derive null
t-statistic distributions. Excerpt labels were permuted within each geographic
location at the level of individual subject stories prior to combining them into
nardocs and comparing different-excerpt similarities as described previously.
Labels were randomized such that each participant contributed no more
than one narrative per nardoc. On each permutation, we calculated Welch ’s
t test between different-excerpt comparisons between two geographic
locations. We did this 2,000 times to create a null distribution for each of
the nine between geographic location comparisons. The 95th percentile of
each null distribution represents the maximum difference expected by chance
(difference threshold). We considered comparisons between different-
excerpt similarity distributions as signi ﬁcantly different if the t-statistic was
greater than 95% of the values from the corresponding permuted null distri-
bution (a one-tailed test).
We conducted similar permutation tests to derive null t-statistic distribu-
tions for within geographic location comparisons. On each permutation, we
calculated Welch’s t test between different-excerpt comparisons for each geo-
graphic location. We did this 2,000 times to create a null distribution for each
of the nine within geographic location comparisons. The 95th percentile of
each null distribution represents the maximum difference expected by chance.
We considered comparisons between different-excerpt similarity distributions
as signiﬁcantly different if the t-statistic was greater than 95% of the values
from the corresponding permuted null distribution (a one-tailed test).
Visualization. We visualized the semantic relationships between narrative
documents by projecting text into a pretrained embedding space and reduc-
ing dimensionality prior to plotting the results. We used the Python package
Gensim to load a word2vec model pretrained on the Google News dataset
(https://code.google.com/archive/p/word2vec/). The model provided a means
to obtain feature vectors for words that reﬂect semantic similarities based on
a large corpus of ∼3 million words and phrases rather than relying on the col-
lection of nardocs used in the present study. The closer two words are in
embedding space, the greater the semantic similarity. Each word within a nar-
rative was projected into the 300-dimensional embedding space. Next, in
order to equally weight each person’sn a r r a t i v ew i t h i nan a r d o c ,w ea v e r a g e d
across word embeddings in each narrative. We then averaged across narra-
tives to ﬁnd the average position in embedding space for each nardoc. We
used the Scikit-learn implementation of principal components analysis [PCA()]
to reduce the dimensionality of the average nardoc embeddings to 50
before further reducing to two-dimensional space using the Scikit-learn
implementation of t-distributed stochastic neighboring entities [T-SNE()]
and, ﬁnally, plotting the two-dimensional nardoc vectors. We chose to ﬁrst
reduce the 300-dimension feature vectors using PCA based on the Scikit-
learn documentation ’s recommendation for reducing noise in the T-SNE
computations. We used the default TSNE() parameters with perplexity set
to 30 and random state set to 5. We ran the computations using a 2.60 GHz
Intel Core i5 processor with 16 GB of RAM running Windows 10 Home (ver-
sion 21H1) on a 64-bit operating system. While the relationships between
vectors in this space are interpretable, the reduced dimensions for the
space are, at best, only coincidently interpretable. This is because the
word2vec projection prior to the dimension reduction is nonlinear and
probability weighted (there is not a unique solution when training the
model). Thus, the reduced number of dimensions in Fig. 1 is not interpret-
able in the way that one would expect a multidimensional scaling solution
to have interpretable dimensions. See ref. 49 for a formal discussion.
Data Availability. All quantitative data have been deposited in OSF ( https://
osf.io/43nqy/)( 5 0 ) .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Xin Kang, Jieqiong Che, Xiyu Wang, Xueying Xu,
Zhentin Liu, Chunzi Li, Xiaotong Ge, and Shengnan Zhao helped with data col-
lection and translation for Dimen participants. We thank Mr. Lee Wai Kit and
the staff at the Dimen Dong Eco-Museum for making data collection possible
and we also thank the people in Dimen who participated in this research. Jew-
elian Fairchild, Gabby Kindig, and Anusha Mamidipaka helped with the collec-
tion of the control data. We also thank Natalie Phillips and the members of
the Digital Humanities and Literary Cognition and Timing, Attention and Per-
ception laboratories at Michigan State University for their many helpful and
insightful comments at various stages of this project. Members of the Univer-
sity of Arkansas Music Cognition Laboratory and the Princeton Music Cogni-
tion Laboratory helped collect the data and contributed important insights to
the project. This research was supported by the Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences of the NSF, Award Numbers 1734063 (Principal
Investigator: J.D.M.) and 1734025 (Principal Investigator: E.H.M.).
1. R. Herbert, Everyday Music Listening: Absorption, Dissociation and Trancing(Ashgate,
2011).
2. K. Jakubowski, “Musical imagery” in The Cambridge Handbook of the Imagination ,
A. Abraham, Ed. (Cambridge, 2020), pp. 187–206.
3. E. H. Margulis, P. C. M. Wong, R. Simchy-Gross, J. D. McAuley, What the music said:
Narrative listening across cultures. Palgrave Commun. 5, 146 (2019).
4. J. D. McAuley, P. C. M. Wong, L. Bellaiche, E. H. Margulis, What drives narrative
engagement with music? Music Percept. 38, 509–521 (2021).
5. J. D. McAuley, P. C. M. Wong, A. Mamidipaka, N. Phillips, E. H. Margulis, Do you hear
what I hear? Perceived narrative constitutes a semantic dimension for music. Cogni-
tion 212, 104712 (2021).
6. D. C. Rubin, S. Umanath, Event memory: A theory of memory for laboratory, autobio-
graphical, and ﬁctional events. Psychol. Rev. 122,1 –23 (2015).
7. D. Hassabis, D. Kumaran, S. D. Vann, E. A. Maguire, Patients with hippocampal
amnesia cannot imagine new experiences.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 104, 1726–1731
(2007).
8. B. Nanay, The role of imagination in decision-making. Mind Lang. 31, 127–143 (2016).
9. C. W. Perky, An experimental study of imagination. A m .J .P s y c h o l .21,4 2 2–452
(1910).
10. P. Tagg, R. Clarida, Ten Little Title Tunes: Towards a Musicology of the Mass Media
(Mass Media Music Scholars’ Press, 2003).
11. E. Huovinen, A.-K. Kaila, The semantics of musical topoi: An empirical approach.
Music Percept. 33, 217–243 (2015).
12. E. H. Margulis, An exploratory study of narrative experiences of music. Music Percept.
35, 235–248 (2017).
13. S. Koelsch et al., Music, language and meaning: Brain signatures of semantic process-
ing. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 302–307 (2004).
14. N. Steinbeis, S. Koelsch, Comparing the processing of music and language meaning
using EEG and fMRI provides evidence for similar and distinct neural representations.
PLoS One 3, e2226 (2008).
15. S. Koelsch, Towards a neural basis of processing musical semantics. Phys. Life Rev. 8,
89–105 (2011).
16. J. G. Painter, S. Koelsch, Can out-of-context musical sounds convey meaning? An ERP
study on the processing of meaning in music. Psychophysiology 48, 645–655 (2011).
17. O. Vartanian, “Imagination in aesthetic experience ” in The Cambridge Handbook of
the Imagination, A. Abraham, Ed. (Cambridge, 2020), pp. 578–592.
18. A. Sheppard, The role of imagination in aesthetic experience. J. Aesthet. Educ. 25,
35–42 (1991).
19. P. E. Savage et al., Music as a coevolved system for social bonding. Behav. Brain Sci.
44, e59 (2020).
20. D. Grocke, The role of the therapist in the Bonny Method of Guided Imagery and
Music (BMGIM). Music Ther. Perspect. 23,4 5–52 (2005).
21. M.-F. Lin et al. , Pivotal moments and changes in the Bonny Method of Guided
Imagery and Music for patients with depression. J. Clin. Nurs. 19, 1139 –1148
(2010).
22. R. L. Blake, S. R. Bishop, The Bonny Method of Guided Imagery and Music (GIM) in the
treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with adults in the psychiatric set-
ting. Music Ther. Perspect. 12, 125–129 (1994).
23. D. S. Burns, The effect of the Bonny Method of Guided Imagery and Music on the
mood and life quality of cancer patients. J. Music Ther. 38,5 1–65 (2001).
24. S. R. Ramsey, The Languages of China (Princeton University Press, 1999).
25. A. Kassabian, Hearing Film: Tracking Identi ﬁcations in Contemporary Hollywood
Film Music (Routledge, 2001).
26. S. E. Robertson, K. Sparck Jones, Relevance weighting of search terms. J. Am. Soc. Inf.
Sci. 27, 129–146 (1976).
27. D. Loughridge, ‘Always already technological’: New views of music and the human in
musicology and the cognitive sciences. Music Res. Annu. 2,1 –22.
28. N. Jacoby et al., cross-cultural work in music cognition: Challenges, insights and rec-
ommendations. Music Percept. 37, 185–195 (2020).
29. N. Wiltsher, A. Meskin, “Art and imagination ” in The Routledge Handbook of the
Philosophy of Imagination, A. Kind, Ed. (Routledge, 2016), pp. 179–191.
30. P. N. Juslin, D. V €astfj€all, Emotional responses to music: The need to consider underly-
ing mechanisms. Behav. Brain Sci. 31, 559–575, discussion 575–621 (2008).
31. M. Strick, H. L. de Bruin, L. C. de Ruiter, W. Jonkers, Striking the right chord: Moving
music increases psychological transportation and behavioral intentions. J. Exp.
Psychol. Appl. 21,5 7–72 (2015).
32. A. Gabrielsson, Strong Experiences with Music: Music Is Much More Than Just Music
(Oxford University Press, 2011).
33. A. M. Bel ﬁ, B. Karlan, D. Tranel, Music evokes vivid autobiographical memories.
Memory 24, 979–989 (2016).
34. B. M. Kubit, P. Janata, Spontaneous mental replay of music improves memory for
incidentally associated event knowledge. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. , 10.1037/xge0001050
(2021).
35. L.-L. Balkwill, W. F. Thompson, A cross-cultural investigation of the perception
of emotion in music: Psychophysical and cultural cues. Music Percept. 17,4 3 –64
(1999).
10 of 11 j PNAS Margulis et al.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119 Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
36. L.-L. Balkwill, W. F. Thompson, R. Matsunaga, Recognition of emotion in Japanese,
Western, and Hindustani music by Japanese listeners. Jpn. Psychol. Res. 46, 337–349
(2004).
37. P. Laukka, T. Eerola, N. S. Thingujam, T. Yamasaki, G. Beller, Universal and culture-
speciﬁc factors in the recognition and performance of musical affect expressions.
Emotion 13, 434–449 (2013).
38. A. S. Cowen, X. Fang, D. Sauter, D. Keltner, What music makes us feel: At least 13
dimensions organize subjective experiences associated with music across different
cultures. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 1924–1934 (2020).
39. M. Tervaniemi, S. Maury, R. N €a€at€anen, Neural representations of abstract stimulus
features in the human brain as re ﬂected by the mismatch negativity. Neuroreport 5,
844–846 (1994).
40. V. N. Salimpoor, M. Benovoy, K. Larcher, A. Dagher, R. J. Zatorre, Anatomically dis-
tinct dopamine release during anticipation and experience of peak emotion to
music. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 257–262 (2011).
41. P. D. Fletcher, C. N. Clark, J. D. Warren, Music, reward and frontotemporal dementia.
Brain 137, e300 (2014).
42. S. Bird, E. Klein, E. Loper, Natural Language Processing with Python (O’Reilly Media,
2009).
43. R. /C20Reh˚u/C20rekm, P. Sojka, “Software framework for topic modelling with large corpora ”
in Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on New Challenges for NLP Frameworks
(ELRA, 2010), pp. 45–50.
44. F. Pedregosa et al., Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 12,
2825–2830 (2011).
45. G. Salton, C. Buckley, Term-weighted approaches in automatic text retrieval. Inf. Pro-
cess. Manage. 24, 513–523 (1988).
46. F. S. Roque et al. , Using electronic patient records to discover disease correlations
and stratify patient cohorts. PLoS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002141 (2011).
47. D. M. Lydon-Staley, D. Zhou, A. S. Blevins, P. Zurn, D. S. Bassett, Hunters, busybodies
and the knowledge network building associated with deprivation curiosity. Nat.
Hum. Behav. 5
, 327–336 (2021).
48. P. H. Westfall, S. S. Young, S. Paul Wright, On adjusting P-values for multiplicity. Bio-
metrics 49, 941–945 (1993).
49. C. Szegedy et al. , Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv [Preprint] (2014).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199 (Accessed 18 December 2021).
50. E. H. Margulis, P. C. M. Wong, C. Turnbull, B. M. Kubit, J. D. McAuley, Narratives
imagined in response to instrumental music. Open Science Framework. https://osf.io/
43nqy/. Deposited 17 December 2021.
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND
COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Margulis et al.
Narratives imagined in response to instrumental music reveal
culture-bounded intersubjectivity
PNAS j 11 of 11
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110406119
