# Neurobiological mechanism of music improving gait disorder in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a mini review

**Authors:** Ling-Zhi Huang
**Year:** D:20
**Subject:** Huang L-Z and Qi Z (2025) Neurobiological mechanism of music improving gait disorder in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a mini review. Front. Neurol. 15:1502561. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561

---

Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org
Neurobiological mechanism of
music improving gait disorder in
patients with Parkinson’s disease:
a mini review
Ling-Zhi Huang 1* and Zhi Qi 2*

### 1 College of Art, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, 2 Department of Basic Medical Sciences, School of

Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
Walking ability is essential for human survival and health. Its basic rhythm is mainly
generated by the central pattern generator of the spinal cord. The rhythmic
stimulation of music to the auditory center affects the cerebral cortex and other
higher nerve centers, and acts on the central pattern generator. By means of
rhythm entrainment, the central pattern generator can produce walking rhythm
synchronized with music rhythm, control muscle tension, and then regulate human
gait. Basal ganglia dysfunction is the main cause of abnormal gait in patients
with Parkinson’s disease. Music therapy provides external rhythmic stimulation,
recruits neural networks to bypass the basal ganglia and synchronizes gait with
external rhythms in both time and space through auditory-motor neural networks,
helping to promote the improvement of abnormal gait patterns in patients with
Parkinson’s disease. KEYWORDS
rhythmic entrainment, central pattern generator, gait, music, Parkinson’s disease

### 1 Introduction

Walking is one of the most basic movements of human beings. The basic characteristic of
walking is the rhythmic movement of alternating left and right foot. Music stimulates the
auditory center through its inherent rhythm, and the auditory center interacts with the motor
center to activate motor neurons. Activated motor neurons send out signal to contract muscles,
coordinating the body and music rhythm to produce synchronous movement (1). Thus,
cognitive and motor functions are enhanced and gait is improved (1, 2). Music therapy can
improve the gait of patients with traumatic brain injury (3, 4), stroke (5, 6), Parkinson’s disease
(PD) (7, 8), and spinal cord injury (9). From a neurophysiological point of view, music therapy
provides external rhythmic stimulation, synchronizes gait with external rhythm by promoting
internal neural timing, and helps to promote the improvement of gait pattern and improve
quality of life. Gait disorder is a common disabling symptom of PD. The structural and functional
connection between auditory area and motor area is the basis of music regulation of walking
rhythm. In order to provide new ideas for the application of music-based therapy in the field,
various combinations of keywords, including music, music therapy, rhythmic auditory
stimulation, gait, Parkinson’s disease, freezing of gait, were used as search terms through Web
of Science for the publication period from 1970 until 2024. A total of 26 relevant published
papers about effect of music on PD were included in this mini review. This paper focuses on
the effect of music on improvement of gait disorder and its neural mechanism in patients
with PD.

## OPEN ACCESS

## EDITED BY

Daniel Weiss, University of Tübingen, Germany

## REVIEWED BY

Carlo Cattaneo, Zambon SpA, Italy
Moritz Anton Loeffler, University of Tübingen, Germany
*CORRESPONDENCE
Ling-Zhi Huang
263980800@qq.com
Zhi Qi
qizhi@xmu.edu.cn
RECEIVED 27 September 2024
ACCEPTED 12 December 2024
PUBLISHED 03 January 2025
CITATION
Huang L-Z and Qi Z (2025) Neurobiological
mechanism of music improving gait disorder
in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a mini
review. Front. Neurol. 15:1502561.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Huang and Qi. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License
(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction
in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with
accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms. TYPE  Mini Review
PUBLISHED  03 January 2025
DOI  10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org

### 2 The neural mechanism of rhythmical

walking and its regulation
2.1 Generation of basic rhythm of walking
The initial signal of walking movement comes from the
voluntary process of cerebral cortex or the emotional process of
limbic system, which requires automatic control of body rhythm
movement (10). Neural networks involved in normal gait
regulation include the cerebral motor cortex, basal ganglia (BG),
thalamus, cerebellum, midbrain motor area, and the brainstem and
spinal cord descending system (11). Modification of gait requires
the transmission of motor programs from the premotor cortex
(PMC) to the brain stem via the reticulospinal system. In response
to signals in proprioceptive and skin afferents, the interspinal
neuron network modifies locomotor patterns in cooperation with
descending signals from the brainstem structures and the cerebral
cortex. The flow of information between the BG, cerebellum, and
brain stem can automatically regulate muscle tension and skeletal
muscle contraction without consciousness, resulting in joint
movement and finally rhythmic walking movement (10). The basic
rhythm of walking movement is generated by central pattern
generators (CPGs) (12–15). The CPG is located in the ventral
motor region of the spinal cord and consists of a variety of
interneurons located within the spinal cord (16). The generation of
rhythm depends on the balance of excitatory and inhibitory
neuron activity, and the neural network composed of inhibitory
interneurons is the main factor to produce the rhythmical activity
of walking. The spinal cord CPG is composed of the spinal cord
interneuron network to form a local oscillation network, which
generates stable oscillation behavior through the mutual inhibition
of neurons to generate stable phase interlock, and controls the
rhythmic movement of walking and other related parts of the body
through self-excited oscillation. Rhythmic interneuronal activity
is sent to secondary interneurons in the intermediate region, which
shape the motor pattern of each limb movement (17). Then, the
signal is transmitted to the target motor neurons, which orderly
activate the extensor and flexor muscles to perform alternating
contractions to stimulate the rhythmic movement of the limb
(Figure 1).
2.2 Neural regulation of rhythmic walking
The rhythmic movement of human walking, after starting, can
be  repeated spontaneously without the need for continuous
control of the brain. However, the seamless and smooth walking
movement requires multiple levels such as spinocerebellar,
spinocerethalamic, and spinocerethalamic tract to transmit
sensory information such as proprioception back to the brain. The
CPG receives signals from proprioception and skin and modifies
movement patterns to coordinate descending information from
the brain stem and cerebral cortex. Functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) of 18 healthy volunteers has shown that the
bilateral dorsal premotor cortex is involved in generating temporal
prediction of auditory rhythm patterns, which is essential for
accurate and precise sensorimotor synchronization (18). In the
rhythm processing, the cerebellum is involved in multiple stages
from sensory prediction to motor control, while the basal ganglia
striatum always plays a role in the preparation of movement (19). A combination of molecular genetics, anatomical tracking, and
imaging techniques has successfully identified several spinal cord
neurons that make up the CPG neural network, as well as their
specific roles during walking and descending input control (20). Electrophysiological and tracking techniques in mice revealed that
the brain stem transmits descending commands to the caudal
spinal cord, which is responsible for starting, stopping, and
regulating the rate of generating rhythmic activity (21). On the
one hand, the changes of neural network structure and synaptic
strength composed of the CPG are regulated by the control
commands of the upper center such as brain, cerebellum and
brainstem. On the other hand, the feedback information from
vision, vestibular sense and proprioception coordinates the
relationship between the CPG and the environment through the
neural reflex mechanism, and adjusts the output of the CPG, so
that the rhythmic movement pattern has better plasticity and the
ability to adapt to real-time changes in the complex
external environment. When walking, somatosensory information is delivered to the
central nervous system, where it is processed and integrated in
numerous cortical and sub-cortical networks and used to execute
motor programs. It is worth noting that the organization of the
neural network controlling movement is very similar in different
vertebrate species (22), indicating that it is very conducive to
vertebrate control of movement in different natural environments. The behavior of vertebrates relies on different neural networks
whose activity is controlled by the brain stem command center. The
descending inputs from this center initiate, maintain, and stop
movement and control speed and direction, which in turn is
controlled by BG (23). The BG exerts inhibitory control over several
motor areas of the brain stem, which in turn control the CPG that
produces basic movement (24). The direct pathway of BG and
striatum projection neurons initiates movement, while the indirect
pathway inhibits movement through the outer white bulb and
subthalamic nucleus. The output of the BG (substantia nigra
reticulum and inner white sphere) acts on the midbrain motor area
consisting of the peduncular nucleus and the cuneate nucleus,
which in turn influences reticulospinal neurons in the lateral
accessory giant cell nucleus that controls the CPG of the spinal cord
(25). Gait is a complex motor task that involves all levels of the
nervous system from cortex to the spinal cord, from locomotor
networks to cognitive networks and requires integration of
neuromuscular networks (24). Failure of the integration will affect
one or more nodes and connections in the locomotor network and
cause failure of effective motor output and give rise to gait disorder,
such as freezing of gait (FoG) in PD patients (26, 27). The forebrain
and in particular the BG are involved in determining motor
programs that should be recruited at a given point of time and can
both initiate and stop locomotor activity (25). In the resting state,
the BG output periodically suppressed the command center of the
mesencephalic locomotor region. During walking, it has been
suggested that the BG produces precisely timed modulation of low

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org
band frequency and beta frequency bands which are disrupted
during pathological gait patterns in PD (28). The BG selects and
allows the relevant CPGs to enter the motor system in the correct
order while inhibiting other behaviors. The BG also controls the
turning on and off of spinal cord CPG activity, as well as the
magnitude and direction of phase lag. Thus, the BG plays a very
important role in determining which CPGs should be active at a
given moment (23).

## FIGURE 1

The neural mechanism of music on gait in patients with Parkinson’s disease (22, 25, 38). Auditory information is conveyed from the cochlear nuclei
to cortical auditory areas. PM, M1, and SMA generate precise motion and posture control commands. BG receives inputs from the cortical motor
area, which is projected to the MLR through different subpopulations of neurons. MLR impinges on reticulospinal neurons to control the spinal
CPGs for locomotion. In normal, the brain networks involved in gait regulation include motor cortex, BG, thalamus, cerebellum, MLR and CPG. The
striatum in BG receives afferent projections from cortical motor area and thalamus. The cerebellum is conducted downward through their
connections with the brainstem and upward to the cortex via the thalamus. In Parkinson’s disease, music guided movements recruits cerebello-
thalamo-cortical motor network and thus bypasses the basal ganglia, as shown by the red arrows. CnF = cuneiform nucleus; CPG = central pattern
generator; GPe = external globus pallidus; GPi = globus pallidus internus; M1 = primary motor cortex; MLR = mesencephalic locomotor region; PM = premotor area; PMRF = pontomedullary reticular formation; PPN = pedunculopontine nucleus; SMA = supplementary motor area; SNC = substantia nigra pars compacta; STN = subthalamic nucleus. Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org

### 3 Neural mechanism of musical

rhythm regulating walking movement
3.1 Influence of music rhythm on body
rhythmic movement
Most people hear music, their body will naturally move,
indicating that music rhythm has a strong impact on the body’s
rhythmic movement. Even young children are sensitive to the
signals carried by the rhythm of music (29). Music is also used in
ritual dances to help synchronize movements and communicate
between group members (30). Musical rhythm synchronizes the
auditory system with the motor system, which can promote the
improvement of motor ability (31) and accelerate motor learning
(32). Music can enhance the connection between rhythmic
auditory perception and motor behaviors (33). In an evolutionary
context, music and dance behaviors are closely related to rhythmic
synchronized movements and can serve as an effective means of
communication and bonding within a group (30). These
phenomena suggest that the human ability to perceive rhythm
may be  selected for coordination among individuals within
a group. A Genome-wide association study can determine genetic variation
in a trait, specifically to detect associations between common single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPS) by testing hundreds of thousands of
genetic variants across many genomes (34). To identify the genetic
alleles associated with beat synchronization ability in humans, a
genome-wide association study of more than 600,000 individuals was
recently conducted in humans. The study found that beat
synchronization exhibited a high degree of polygenic structure, with 70
“sentinel” SNPS at 69 genomic loci reaching genome-wide significance,
and a total of 6,160 SNPS passing the genome-wide significance
threshold. These genetic correlations suggest a common genetic
structure between beat synchronization and biorhythms such as
breathing and movement (35). Music, with its unique rhythm, is one of
the ideal ways to drive movement (32). Interestingly, a variety of
animals also has the ability to channel body movements into a rhythmic
auditory rhythm. Music was present in the common ancestor of
humans and chimpanzees about 6 million years ago (36). This
conservatism explains the importance of sound rhythm in the
regulation of motor rhythm.
3.2 The structural and functional
connection between auditory area and
motor area is the basis of music regulation
of walking rhythm
People often follow rhythm when they hear rhythmic music, so
there is a deep relationship between the motor center in human brain
and the auditory center that perceives rhythmic music. The individual
auditory system uses the externalized auricle to capture sound
frequency information, and the sound signal is converted into an
electrical signal and transmitted from the cochlear auditory nerve to
the anterior cochlear ventral nucleus, and finally into the auditory
center of the cerebral cortex. The auditory area is adjacent to the motor
area, and the two areas are prone to interaction. Results from fMRI have
shown that the BG is activated during beat perception of musical
rhythms. In people with musical training, there is increased
connectivity between the motor and auditory areas of the cerebral
cortex (37). Within the cerebral cortex, rhythm and audio-motor
interactions occur in a widely distributed and layered network of
neurons extending from the brainstem and spinal cord to the
cerebellum, BG and cortical ring, thus facilitating the interaction
between the auditory and motor systems (38). The extensive connection
between auditory and motor systems in the brain promotes the
synchronization of rhythmic music and walking movement to produce
coordinated movement, which is the neural basis for music to improve
movement efficiency (33).
3.3 The entrainment of walking movement
rhythm by music and its neurobiological
mechanism
The discovery of entrainment dates back to 1,666, when Christiaan
Huygens noted that two pendulum clocks had independent
frequencies or periods of motion when they moved independently. However, the two pendulum clocks interact and eventually
synchronize and lock into a stable rhythm or cycle when placed on the
same flexible surface (39). Since then, similar phenomena have been
observed in various mechanical devices and biological systems, which
exhibit rhythmic behavior with periodic oscillations (40). Entrainment
is often defined as the process by which two or more biological or
mechanical systems interact to synchronize resulting in various forms
of temporal coordination (41, 42). Music entrainment is to cause the
change of neural oscillation of corresponding frequency in the brain
through the perception of the time and hierarchical structure of the
music rhythm, and make the movement frequency of human limbs
spontaneously synchronize with the external music rhythm. Studies on sensorimotor synchronization have shown that the
sensorimotor cortex, supplementary motor area (SMA) and PMC, as
well as the cerebellar thalamic cortex, posterior parietal area and
cerebellar network are all involved in the synchronization beat task. CPGs not only produce motor rhythms, but may also promote audio-
motor synchronization (43). The highly interactive circuitry of the
cerebellum, BG and cerebral cortex supports the transmission of
cerebellar time prediction to the thalamo-striator-cortical network
(44). Neuroimaging studies have found that motor areas of the brain
are activated even when humans passively listen to metric-based
rhythms, suggesting that the motor system also plays an important
role in processing rhythms (45). During the synchronization of
movement and rhythmic music, the frontal parietal network consisting
of lateral prefrontal and subparietal regions, BG and cerebellum was
more active (46). Music-related activities, such as listening to and
making music, promote the connectivity of brain regions involved in
a large number of cortical and subcortical structures, thus affecting
body motor function (47). Entrainment phenomenon can even occur
at the level of neurons. Neuron activity has its own spontaneous
oscillation mode, in the absence of external stimulation. However, the
spontaneous oscillation mode of the neuron changes, and tends to
adapt to the external stimulus when the amplitude, phase, presentation
frequency and action time of the external stimulus act on the neuron. When more and more neurons are affected, the corresponding neuron
clusters show activity patterns consistent with external stimuli, and
can be  observed by neuroscientific research methods such as

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org
electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography. Entrainment,
as a form of communication between organized and connected
neurons, is therefore an important principle in neurosciences (48).

### 4 Neurobiological mechanism of

music improving gait disorder in PD
4.1 Gait disorder symptoms of PD
Gait disorder is a common disabling symptom of PD patients (49). The loss of postural control and altered locomotion patterns in PD
cause impaired balance disturbances, falls, tremor, muscular rigidity,
bradykinesia, en bloc turns, festination, and FoG, which plays an
important role in the quality of life, morbidity, and mortality of
patients with PD (50–52). The pathophysiological mechanisms of FoG
and postural control involves a large brain network where motor,
sensory, and cognitive/emotional systems intersect. Therefore, in
2022, the Journal of the Movement Disorder Society has held a critical
panel discussion about gait abnormalities in PD, indicating that it is
necessary to develop “systems neuroscience” strategy to study the
circuits/networks involved. In most cases, symptoms start in one side
of the body with contralateral symptoms appearing within a few years. A quarter to 60% of patients experience freezing of movements usually
after several years from onset (53). Therefore, gait recovery is an
important goal of rehabilitation programs for patients with PD.
4.2 Neural mechanisms of PD
It has been recognized that the loss of dopaminergic signaling in
many BG regions is the main cause of the motor symptoms of PD (54,
55). Medium spiny neurons in the direct and indirect pathways of the
BG circuit control motor promotion and motor inhibition,
respectively, and the two work together to complete normal
movement. Dopamine can enhance the activity of the direct pathway
through the D1 receptor and inhibit the activity of the indirect
pathway through the D2 receptor. In the indirect pathway, external
globus pallidus (GPe) GABAergic neurons innervate the same
interface nuclei and the neighboring subthalamic nucleus (STN). The
activation of indirect pathway inhibits GPe activity, and strengthens
basal ganglia GABAergic signal by directly relieving the inhibition of
interface nuclei and enhancing excitatory STN input, thereby
suppressing movement (55). By conceiving a neurorobotic platform
to emulate the key components of walking under well-controlled
conditions, it has been shown that the subthalamic nucleus (STN) not
only encodes the initiation, termination, and amplitude of leg muscle
activation, but also determines the encoding of leg muscle synergies
during standing and walking (56). Thus, Parkinson’s disease (PD) is
mainly characterized by dopamine depletion in basal ganglia motor
circuit, which results in tremor, bradykinesia, reduced movement and
slow movement, and difficulty in initiating autonomic movement and
other motor disorders of PD (55, 57). With the progress in recording technology, especially the sensing
technology from implanted deep brain stimulation (DBS) electrodes,
it is possible to perform simultaneously local field potentials (LFP)
recordings and electromyographic recordings of patients during
walking through a course that induced FoG episodes. The introduction
of DBS not only improved treatment of movement disorders but also
led to a better understanding of the pathophysiology of these
disorders. These studies indicated that some specific oscillatory
patterns relative to the gait cycle are modulated in the cortical–
subcortical circuits and locomotor network in PD. For example,
subthalamic stimulation modulates both large-scale cortical motor-
network activity and synchronization in PD (58). Increases in both
low beta and theta subthalamic nucleus activity enhances vulnerability
to FoG (59). Recenly, neuromuscular circuit mechanisms of FoG in
PD has been revealed by simultaneously recording LFPs of
subthalamic nucleus and surface electromyography of antagonistic leg
muscles and gait kinematics in patients while walking in straight-line
and in freezing (60). This study shows that there are specific activation-
deactivation abnormalities of oscillatory activity of the subthalamic
nucleus both before and during a freeze and subthalamo-spinal
circuits entrain the spinal motor neurons to a defective timing and
activation pattern. When PD freezers turning into freezing, reciprocity
between antagonistic muscles is disturbed, co-contraction of the
antagonist muscles is increased and subthalamo-muscular coherence
with the gastrocnemius muscles before the freeze is increased as well.
4.3 Neural mechanism of improvement of
gait disorder with music in patients with PD
Motor rhythms depend on different brain regions, such as the
auditory cortex, inferior parietal and frontal regions. These regions
appear to be unaffected by the pathophysiology of PD, but are not
easily accessible due to impaired function of the BG, which senses
internal timing and internal rhythms. External rhythm cues, on the
other hand, include sensory stimuli such as visual and auditory, and
can serve as alternative cues for impaired internal time. Cerebellum
has the ability to process time perception and movement execution,
and cerebellar injury affects the rapid rhythm process. Thus, the
rhythmic stimulation of music and the execution of synchronous
movements can recruit the cerebellum to recalibrate the motor
sensory feedback signals of the internal rhythm to compensate the
explicit time disruption for the BG-SMA-PMC (61). The direct
projection of cerebellar and other brain regions by auditory cortex
provides an anatomical basis for the influence of rhythmic auditory
stimulation on cerebellar activities (62). Rhythm entrainment is one of the important mechanisms for the
successful application of rhythmic music stimulation in the
rehabilitation of movement disorders (63). Musical rhythm acts as an
activation signal to stimulate the motor system of PD patients to
synchronize with the musical rhythm. The use of rhythm music
stimulation in patients with PD is mainly to activate rhythm
entrainment, that is, to lock in the synchronization of auditory rhythm
and body movement. In walking exercises synchronized with rhythm
music, patients with PD activate motor networks related to rhythm
perception, regulate movement through music, and repeat the same
action each time, thus accelerating motor learning and increasing the
plasticity of learning (64). For example, when patients perform
synchronized movements in response to rhythmic musical stimuli,
functional neural connections between the auditory cortex and the
executive control network and between the executive control network
and the cerebellum increase (65). Rhythmic auditory stimulation can
effectively improve walking speed and step length, enhance walking

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org
stability, decreases the turn time, and reduces the number and the
mean duration of the freezing episodes in a FOG eliciting task (66,
67). Music-based movement therapy improved comprehensive motor
functions, including gait velocity, the max ankle dorsiflexion in stance,
ankle range of motion, and the max extensor moment in stance in PD
patients with FOG (68). A systematic review showed that music-based
movement therapy can be used to increase gait stability in PD patients
with FOG and improve their quality of life (69). A fMRI study
performed on the rhythmic motor behavior of PD patients
demonstrated that musical stimulation increased functional neural
connectivity between the auditory cortex and the executive control
network, and between the executive control network and the
cerebellum (70). Therefore, the use of rhythmic auditory stimulation
to enhance the functional connection between the auditory area and
the motor area (71) can promote the synchronization of the walking
movement rhythm with the external musical rhythm, improve the gait
and continuously improve the motor ability (72) (Figure 1).

### 5 Conclusion

Dysrhythmic walking caused by impaired BG function is one of
the main reasons for abnormal gait in PD. The external rhythmic
auditory stimulation provided by music can recruits cerebellar and
other brain regions. Then, the motor sensory feedback signal of the
internal rhythm is recalibrated by rhythm entrainment to compensate
for the impaired BG function and induce the walking movement to
synchronize with the external musical rhythm. These processes lay the
foundation for the treatment and improvement of gait disorders in
PD. At present, therapeutic options on PD are not satisfactory. Pharmacological or surgical treatment has a limited effect on alleviating
PD symptoms (51). Therefore, a variety of rehabilitation strategies has
been used to improve symptoms in PD patients. The combination of
conventional treatment and non-pharmacological intervention may
be a new direction for the rehabilitation of PD patients and will have a
significant beneficial impact on the quality of life of PD patients (73,
74). Studying the neuronal activity in the relevant brain area by using
DBS technique to record LFP of neurons during music stimulation will
be  helpful to illustrate the neurobiological mechanism of music
stimulation. On the other hand, musical stimulation is a low cost, easy
to control, simple and feasible neuroregulation method, while rhythm
is an inherent characteristic of music that can cause synchronization of
neural network behaviors. Therefore, combining music therapy with
other therapies, such as DBS, is a topic worthy of future research. Author contributions
L-ZH: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. ZQ: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Funding
The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Generative AI statement
The authors declare that no Gen AI was used in the creation of
this manuscript. Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations,
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product
that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. References

### 1. Fan L, Hu EY, Hey GE, Hu W. Music therapy for gait and speech deficits in Parkinson’s

disease: a mini-review. Brain Sci. (2023) 13:993. doi: 10.3390/brainsci13070993
2.	von Schnehen A, Hobeika L, Huvent-Grelle D, Samson S. Sensorimotor
synchronization in healthy aging and neurocognitive disorders. Front Psychol. (2022)
13:838511. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.838511

### 3. Kline Anthony E, Moschonas Eleni H, Bondi CO. Music as medicine for traumatic

brain injury: a perspective on future research directions. Neural Regen Res. (2024)
19:2105–6. doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.392862

### 4. Mishra R, Florez-Perdomo WA, Shrivatava A, Chouksey P, Raj S, Moscote-Salazar

LR, et al. Role of music therapy in traumatic brain injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. World Neurosurg. (2021) 146:197–204. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.10.130

### 5. Collimore AN, Roto Cataldo AV, Aiello AJ, Sloutsky R, Hutchinson KJ, Harris B,

et al. Autonomous control of music to retrain walking after stroke. Neurorehab Neural
Res. (2023) 37:255–65. doi: 10.1177/15459683231174223

### 6. Liu Q, Liu Z, Cheng H, Xu Y, Wang F, Liu L, et al. The impact of reminiscent music

therapy and robot-assisted rehabilitation on older stroke patients: a protocol for a randomized
controlled trial. Front Neurol. (2024) 15:1345629. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1345629

### 7. Lee H, Ko B. Effects of music-based interventions on motor and non-motor

symptoms in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and Meta-analysis. Int J Environ Res Public Health. (2023) 20:1046. doi: 10.3390/ijerph20021046

### 8. Gooßes M, Saliger J, Folkerts A-K, Nielsen J, Zierer J, Schmoll P, et al. Feasibility of

music-assisted treadmill training in Parkinson’s disease patients with and without deep
brain stimulation: insights from an ongoing pilot randomized controlled trial. Front
Neurol. (2020) 11:790. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2020.00790

### 9. Ghai S. Does music therapy improve gait after traumatic brain injury and spinal

cord injury? A Mini systematic review and Meta-analysis. Brain Sci. (2023) 13:522. doi:
10.3390/brainsci13030522

### 10. Takakusaki K. Neurophysiology of gait: from the spinal cord to the frontal lobe. Movement Disord. (2013) 28:1483–91. doi: 10.1002/mds.25669

### 11. Takakusaki K. Functional neuroanatomy for posture and gait control. J Mov

Disord. (2017) 10:1–17. doi: 10.14802/jmd.16062

### 12. Roeder L, Breakspear M, Kerr GK, Boonstra TW. Dynamics of brain-muscle

networks reveal effects of age and somatosensory function on gait. iScience. (2024)
27:109162. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.109162

### 13. Ren J, Gosgnach S. Localization of rhythm generating components of the

mammalian locomotor central pattern generator. Neuroscience. (2023) 513:28–37. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2023.01.013

### 14. Montgomery JC. Roles for cerebellum and subsumption architecture in central

pattern generation. J Comp Physiol A. (2024) 210:315–24. doi: 10.1007/
s00359-023-01634-w

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org

### 15. Wenger N, Vogt A, Skrobot M, Garulli EL, Kabaoglu B, Salchow-Hömmen C, et al. Rodent models for gait network disorders in Parkinson’s disease-a translational
perspective. Exp Neurol. (2022) 352:114011. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2022.114011

### 16. Rancic V, Gosgnach S. Recent insights into the rhythmogenic core of the

locomotor CPG. Int J Mol Sci. (2021) 22:1394. doi: 10.3390/ijms22031394

### 17. Jankowska E. Basic principles of processing of afferent information by spinal

interneurons. J Neurophysiol. (2022) 128:689–95. doi: 10.1152/jn.00344.2022

### 18. Miyata K, Yamamoto T, Fukunaga M, Sugawara S, Sadato N. Neural correlates with

individual differences in temporal prediction during auditory-motor synchronization. Cereb Cortex Commun. (2022) 3:tgac014. doi: 10.1093/texcom/tgac014

### 19. Kameda M, Niikawa K, Uematsu A, Tanaka M. Sensory and motor representations

of internalized rhythms in the cerebellum and basal ganglia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
(2023) 120:e2221641120. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2221641120

### 20. Haque F, Gosgnach S. Mapping connectivity amongst interneuronal components

of the locomotor CPG. Front Cell Neurosci. (2019) 13:443. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00443

### 21. Capelli P, Pivetta C, Soledad Esposito M, Arber S. Locomotor speed control

circuits in the caudal brainstem. Nature. (2017) 551:373–7. doi: 10.1038/nature24064

### 22. Suryanarayana SM, Robertson B, Grillner S. The neural bases of vertebrate motor

behaviour through the lens of evolution. Philos Trans R Soc. (2021) 377:20200521. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2020.0521

### 23. Favila N, Gurney K, Overton P. Role of the basal ganglia in innate and learned

behavioural sequences. Rev Neurosci. (2024) 35:35–55. doi: 10.1515/revneuro-2023-0038

### 24. Arber S, Costa RM. Networking brainstem and basal ganglia circuits for

movement. Nat Rev Neurosci. (2022) 23:342–60. doi: 10.1038/s41583-022-00581-w

### 25. Grillner S, El Manira A. Current principles of motor control, with special reference

to vertebrate locomotion. Physiol Rev. (2020) 100:271–320. doi: 10.1152/
physrev.00015.2019

### 26. Weiss D, Schoellmann A, Fox MD, Bohnen NI, Factor SA, Nieuwboer A, et al. Freezing of gait: understanding the complexity of an enigmatic phenomenon. Brain.
(2020) 143:14–30. doi: 10.1093/brain/awz314

### 27. Quek DYL, Taylor N, Gilat M, Lewis SJG, Ehgoetz Martens KA. Effect of dopamine

on limbic network connectivity at rest in Parkinson's disease patients with freezing of
gait. Transl Neurosci. (2024) 15:20220336. doi: 10.1515/tnsci-2022-0336

### 28. Wang DD, Choi JT. Brain network oscillations during gait in Parkinson's disease. Front Hum Neurosci. (2020) 14:568703. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2020.568703

### 29. Zentner M, Eerola T. Rhythmic engagement with music in infancy. Proc Natl Acad

Sci USA. (2010) 107:5768–73. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1000121107

### 30. Greenfield MD, Merker B. Coordinated rhythms in animal species, including

humans: entrainment from bushcricket chorusing to the philharmonic orchestra. Biobehav Rev. (2023) 153:105382:105382. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105382

### 31. Zhang J, Huang Y, Dong Y, Li J, Zhu L, Zhao M. The effect of music tempo on

movement flow. Front Psychol. (2024) 15:1292516. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1292516

### 32. Samadi A, Rasti J, Emadi M. Enhancing gait cadence through rhythm-modulated

music: a study on healthy adults. Comput Biol Med. (2024) 174:108465:108465. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiomed.2024.108465

### 33. Zaatar MT, Alhakim K, Enayeh M, Tamer R. The transformative power of music:

insights into neuroplasticity, health, and disease. Brain Behav Immun-Health. (2024)
35:100716. doi: 10.1016/j.bbih.2023.100716

### 34. Uffelmann E, Huang QQ, Munung NS, de Vries J, Okada Y, Martin AR, et al. Genome-wide association studies. Nat Rev Methods Primers. (2021) 1:59. doi: 10.1038/
s43586-021-00056-9

### 35. Niarchou M, Gustavson DE, Sathirapongsasuti JF, Anglada-Tort M, Eising E, Bell

E, et al. Genome-wide association study of musical beat synchronization demonstrates
high polygenicity. Nat Hum Behav. (2022) 6:1292–309. doi: 10.1038/s41562-022-01359-x

### 36. Hattori Y, Tomonaga M. Rhythmic swaying induced by sound in chimpanzees

(Pan troglodytes). Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. (2020) 117:936–42. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1910318116

### 37. Grahn JA. The role of the basal ganglia in beat perception: neuroimaging and

neuropsychological investigations. Ann N Y Acad Sci. (2009) 1169:35–45. doi: 10.1111/j.
1749-6632.2009.04553.x

### 38. Lesicko AMH, Geffen MN. Diverse functions of the auditory cortico-collicular

pathway. Hear Res. (2022) 425:108488:108488. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2022.108488

### 39. Rosso M, Moens B, Leman M, Moumdjian L. Neural entrainment underpins

sensorimotor synchronization to dynamic rhythmic stimuli. NeuroImage. (2023)
277:120226:120226. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120226

### 40. Aharoni M, Breska A, Müller MM, Schröger E. Mechanisms of sustained

perceptual entrainment after stimulus offset. Eur J Neurosci. (2024) 59:1047–60. doi:
10.1111/ejn.16032

### 41. Schiavio A, Witek MAG, Stupacher J. Meaning-making and creativity in musical

entrainment. Front Psychol. (2024) 14:1326773. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1326773

### 42. Li J-W, Lu X, Yang H-Y, Hu L. Rhythmic auditory stimuli induced neural

oscillation entrainment and its applications. Prog Biochem Biophys. (2023) 50:1371–80.
doi: 10.16476/j.pibb.2022.0266

### 43. Damm L, Varoqui D, de V, Dalla S, Bardy B. Why do we move to the beat? A multi-

scale approach, from physical principles to brain dynamics. Neurosci Biobehav Rev.
(2020) 112:553–84. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.024

### 44. Caligiore D, Pezzulo G, Baldassarre G, Bostan AC, Strick PL, Doya K, et al. Consensus paper: towards a systems-level view of cerebellar function: the interplay
between cerebellum, basal ganglia, and cortex. Cerebellum. (2017) 16:203–29. doi:
10.1007/s12311-016-0763-3

### 45. Cannon JJ, Patel AD. How beat perception co-opts motor neurophysiology. Trends

Cogn Sci. (2021) 25:137–50. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2020.11.002

### 46. Wu Z, Kong L, Zhang Q. Research Progress of music therapy on gait intervention

in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Int J Environ Res Public Health. (2022) 19:9568. doi:
10.3390/ijerph19159568

### 47. Tramontano M, de S, Mastrogiacomo S, Princi A, Ciancarelli I, Frizziero A, et al. Music-based techniques and related devices in neurorehabilitation: a scoping review. Expert Rev Med Devices. (2021) 18:733–49. doi: 10.1080/17434440.2021.1947793

### 48. Kazanina N, Tavano A. What neural oscillations can and cannot do for syntactic

structure building. Nat Rev Neurosci. (2023) 24:113–28. doi: 10.1038/s41583-022-00659-5

### 49. Tosserams A, Bloem BR, Nonnekes J. Compensation strategies for gait

impairments in Parkinson's disease: from underlying mechanisms to daily clinical
practice. Mov Disord. (2023) 10: S56–62. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.13616

### 50. Bohnen NI, Costa RM, Dauer WT, Factor SA, Giladi N, Hallett M, et al. Discussion

of research priorities for gait disorders in parkinson's disease. Mov Disord. (2022)
37:253–63. doi: 10.1002/mds.28883

### 51. Bloem B, Okun M, Klein C. Parkinson's disease. Lancet. (2021) 397:2284–303. doi:

10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00218-X

### 52. Kulcsarova K, Skorvanek M, Postuma RB, Berg D. Defining Parkinson’s disease:

past and future. J Parkinsons Dis. (2024) 14: S257–71. doi: 10.3233/JPD-230411

### 53. Sveinbjornsdottir S. The clinical symptoms of Parkinson's disease. J Neurochem.

(2016) 139:318–24. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13691

### 54. O’Shea IM, Popal HS, Olson IR, Murty VP, Smith DV. Distinct alterations in

cerebellar connectivity with substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area in Parkinson’s
disease. Sci Rep. (2022) 12:3289. doi: 10.1038/s41598-022-07020-x

### 55. Zhai S, Cui Q, Simmons DNV, Surmeier DJ. Distributed dopaminergic signaling

in the basal ganglia and its relationship to motor disability in Parkinson's disease. Curr
Opin Neurobiol. (2023) 83:102798. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2023.102798

### 56. Thenaisie Y, Lee K, Moerman C, Scafa S, Galvez A, Pirondini E, et al. Principles of

gait encoding in the subthalamic nucleusof people with Parkinson’s disease. Sci Transl
Med. (2022) 14:eabo1800. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abo1800

### 57. Leiras R, Cregg JM, Kiehn O. Brainstem circuits for locomotion. Annu Rev

Neurosci. (2022) 45:63–85. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-082321-025137

### 58. Weiss D, Klotz R, Govindan RB, Scholten M, Naros G, Ramos-Murguialday A,

et al. Subthalamic stimulation modulates cortical motor network activity and
synchronization in Parkinson's disease. Brain. (2015) 138:679–93. doi: 10.1093/
brain/awu380

### 59. Chen CC, Yeh CH, Chan HL, Chang YJ, Tu PH, Yeh CH, et al. Subthalamic nucleus

oscillations correlate with vulnerability to freezing of gait in patients with Parkinson’s
disease. Neurobiol Dis. (2019) 132:104605. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2019.104605

### 60. Klocke P, Loeffler MA, Muessler H, Breu MS, Gharabaghi A, Weiss D. Supraspinal

contributions to defective antagonistic inhibition and freezing of gait in Parkinson’s
disease. Brain. (2024) 147:4056–71. doi: 10.1093/brain/awae223

### 61. Sen S, Kawaguchi A, Truong Y, Lewis MM, Huang X. Dynamic changes in

cerebello-thalamo-cortical motor circuitry during progression of Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience. (2010) 166:712–9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.036

### 62. Bostan AC, Dum RP, Strick PL. Cerebellar networks with the cerebral cortex and

basal ganglia. Trends Cogn Sci. (2013) 17:241–54. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.03.003

### 63. Thaut MH, McIntosh GC, Hoemberg V. Neurobiological foundations of neurologic

music therapy: rhythmic entrainment and the motor system. Front Psychol. (2015)
5:1185. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01185

### 64. Burrai F. Apuzzo, L and Zanotti, R effectiveness of rhythmic auditory stimulation

on gait in Parkinson disease. Holist Nurs Pract. (2024) 38:109–19. doi: 10.1097/
HNP.0000000000000462

### 65. Devlin K, Alshaikh JT, Pantelyat A. Music therapy and music-based interventions

for movement disorders. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. (2019) 19:83. doi: 10.1007/
s11910-019-1005-0

### 66. Braun Janzen T, Koshimori Y, Richard NM, Thaut MH. Rhythm and music-based

interventions in motor rehabilitation: current evidence and future perspectives. Front
Hum Neurosci. (2021) 15:789467. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.789467

### 67. Arias P, Cudeiro J. Effect of rhythmic auditory stimulation on gait in parkinsonian

patients with and without freezing of gait. PLoS One. (2010) 5:e9675. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0009675

### 68. Li K-p, Zhang Z-q, Zhou Z-l, Su JQ, Wu XH, Shi BH, et al. Effect of music-based

movement therapy on the freezing of gait in patients with Parkinson’s disease: a
randomized controlled trial. Front Aging Neurosci. (2022) 14:924784. doi: 10.3389/
fnagi.2022.924784

Huang and Qi
10.3389/fneur.2024.1502561
Frontiers in Neurology

frontiersin.org

### 69. Zhou Z, Zhou R, Wei W, Luan R, Li K. Effects of music-based movement therapy

on motor function, balance, gait, mental health, and quality of life for patients with
Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Rehabil. (2021)
35:937–51. doi: 10.1177/0269215521990526

### 70. Naro A, Pignolo L, Bruschetta D, Calabrò RS. What about the role of the

cerebellum in music-associated functional recovery? A secondary EEG analysis of a
randomized clinical trial in patients with Parkinson disease. Parkinsonism Relat Disord.
(2022) 96:57–64. doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2022.02.012

### 71. Colverson A, Barsoum S, Cohen R, Williamson J. Rhythmic musical activities may

strengthen connectivity between brain networks associated with aging-related deficits
in timing and executive functions. Exp Gerontol. (2024) 186:112354. doi: 10.1016/j.
exger.2023.112354

### 72. Schaffert N, Janzen TB, Mattes K, Thaut MH. A review on the relationship between

sound and movement in sports and rehabilitation. Front Psychol. (2019) 10:244. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00244

### 73. He S, Fang W, Wu J, Lv H, Zhang J, Wang T, et al. Whether mindfulness-guided

therapy can be a new direction for the rehabilitation of patients with Parkinson’s
disease: a network meta-analysis of non-pharmacological alternative motor−/sensory-
based
interventions. Front
Psychol.
(2023)
14:1162574.
doi:
10.3389/
fpsyg.2023.1162574
74.	van Wamelen DJ, Rukavina K, Podlewska AM, Chaudhuri K. Advances in the
pharmacological and non-pharmacological Management of non-motor Symptoms in
Parkinson's disease: an update since 2017. Curr Neuropharmacol. (2023) 21:1786–805.
doi: 10.2174/1570159X20666220315163856
