# MP3604_05_Parncutt 406..430

**Author:** Unknown  
**Subject:** N/A  
**Total Pages:** 25  
**Source File:** `a (10).pdf`

---

## Page 1

TONE PROFILES OF ISOLATED MUSICAL CHORDS :PSYCHOACOUSTIC
VERSUS COGNITIVE MODELS
RICHARD PARNCUTT ,SABRINA SATTMANN ,
ANDREAS GAICH ,& A NNEMARIE SEITHER -PREISLER
University of Graz, Graz, Austria
WE INVESTIGATED PERCEPTION OF VIRTUAL
pitches at missing fundamentals (MFs) in musical chords
of three chromas (simultaneous trichords). Tone profiles
for major, minor, diminished, augmented, suspended,
and four other trichords of octave-complex tones were
determined. In Experiment 1, 40 musicians rated how
well a tone went with a preceding chord; in Experiment
2, whether the tone was in the chord. Mean ratings for
nine non-chord tones were compared with predictions of
four models: MFs, diatonicity, 5th-interval relations, and
tones that complete familiar tetrachords (e.g., 7th
chords). Profiles were accounted for by all four models
in Experiment 1, and two (MFs, 5th relations) in Exper-
iment 2. Overall, effect size was largest for MFs. In Exper-
iment 3, listeners heard a chord and chose a matching
tone from 12 possibilities. Profile peaks were predicted
by pitch models (usually, the lower tone of a perfect 5th).
Participants who more likely attended to MFs in isolated
harmonic complex tones (fundamental listeners) were
not more sensitive to MFs in chords, suggesting their
responses instead depended on statistical properties of
familiar music. We propose a speculative, psychohistoric
explanation: MFs influenced the historical development
of musical structure, which in turn influenced the per-
ception of enculturated modern listeners.
Received: June 24, 2016, accepted February 3, 2019.
Key words: harmony, tonality, pitch, missing funda-
mental, chord root
MAJOR-MINOR TONALITY IS THE MOST
familiar system of structuring pitch in West-
ern tonal music. Pitches and pitch patterns
are perceived in relation to a major or minor scale,
a major or minor triad (the tonic chord), or a tone (the
tonic) (Cuddy & Badertscher, 1987; Krumhansl, 1990).
The musical surface can often be reduced to, or is per-
ceived as, familiar harmonic progressions (Holleran,
Jones, & Butler, 1995). How we perceive musicalstructures depends on our auditory experience, which
in turn depends on how musical structures developed in
the past (Lynch, Eilers, Oller, & Urbano, 1990). The
familiar pitch-time patterns of major-minor tonality
emerged during a long period of musical development
(Dahlhaus, 1968/1990). The structure of early Western
polyphony was governed by a combination of explicit
compositional rules and implicit perceptual principles
(e.g., Eberlein, 1994; Huron, 2001).
To understand how major-minor tonality works, we
need to understand both the psychological and the his-
torical (here: psychohistoric ) origins of Western tonal
pitch structures. Overarching questions include: Why are
some pitch combinations more consonant or common
(prevalent) than others? How did the perception of con-
sonance and dissonance develop historically? Why have
major and minor triads played such a central role in
Western polyphony since the 14th century?1Why did
major-minor tonality emerge in the 16th-17th centuries
and why did it come to dominate most (Western) music?
Questions of this kind involve both humanities and
sciences. From a scientific perspective, major-minor
tonality emerged historically under the constant influ-
ence of universal principles of perception and cognition
(Eberlein, 1994; Parncutt, 2011a). Scientists in disci-
plines such as acoustics, psychology, biology, mathemat-
ics, and computing attempt to reduce major-minor
tonality to underlying psychophysical and neurocogni-
tive principles (Bharucha, 1984, 1987; Deutsch & Feroe,
1981; Krumhansl, 1990; Tillmann, Bharucha, & Bigand,
2000; Trainor & Trehub, 1994). Humanities scholars in
disciplines such as music theory, music analysis, music
history, and music sociology tend instead to regard
major-minor tonality as a complex, partly arbitrary out-
come of historical, social, cultural, and political interac-
tions (Lowinsky, 1954; No rton, 1984). Humanities
1In musical set theory, a set of three different chromas (octave-
generalized pitches) is a trichord (Rahn, 1980). The term triad tends to
be reserved for major, minor, diminished, and augmented triads; that is,
for musically familiar or basic trichords. If some tones in a trichord are
doubled (played in more than one octave register), the chord comprises
three chromas but more than three tones. A tetrachord is a set of four
chromas. By polyphony we mean music comprising several partly inde-
pendent voices (rather than voices that move in parallel).
Music Perception ,VOLUME 36, ISSUE 4,PP. 406–430, ISSN 0730-7829, ELECTRONIC ISSN 1533-8312. ©2019 BY THE REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA ALL
RIGHTS RESERVED .PLEASE DIRECT ALL REQUESTS FOR PERMISSION TO PHOTOCOPY OR REPRODUCE ARTICLE CONTENT THROUGH THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS ’S
REPRINTS AND PERMISSIONS WEB PAGE ,HTTPS ://WWW .UCPRESS .EDU/JOURNALS /REPRINTS -PERMISSIONS . DOI: https://doi.org/10.1525/ MP.2019.36.4.406406 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 2

scholars and scientists ask similar questions about musi-
cal structure, but adopt different approaches. Psycholo-
gists may ask about perception and cognition today but
ignore the past, despite evidence that perception gener-
ally depends on culture and history (Nisbett, Peng,
Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001). Historians and music the-
orists may study the history of music and music theory
but ignore empirical psychology.
Humanities scholars and scientists (in both ‘‘psycho-
acoustic’’ and ‘‘cognitive’’ approaches) agree that pitches
in tonal musical contexts vary in importance, but use
different words to describe such variations (e.g., stabil-
ity, salience, hierarchy). Krumhansl (1990) presented
diverse experimental data that provided:
a quantitative measure of the hierarchical ordering
imposed on the individual tones in tonal contexts. In
music-theoretical terms, the rating might be identi-
fied with the relative stability or structural signifi-
cance of tones as they function within tonal
contexts. It will be argued that this hierarchy is, in
some sense, basic to the structuring of music itself
and also to the psychological response to music.
This identification of a music-theoretical construct
and a pattern of psychological data, then, represents
a point of contact between the structure contained
within the music and described by music theory, and
the listener’s response to that structure. (Krumhansl,
1990, p. 16)
What is the origin of these differences between more
and less stable tones? From a psychoacoustic viewpoint,
tones with the same amplitude and waveform, when
presented simultaneously, can differ in perceptual
salience for two reasons. First, masking among nearby
partials tends to make inner voices in a musical texture
less salient than outer voices. Second, complex tone
perception tends to increase the salience of tones that
correspond to periodicities or fundamentals (Moore,
2003; Terhardt, Stoll, & Seewann, 1982).
In addition, missing fundamentals (MFs) may be per-
ceived at pitches not corresponding to chord tones (that
is, at non-chord pitches corresponding to non-chord
tones ).2For example, Parncutt (1988) predicted that
an A-minor triad (ACE) evokes weak pitches at D and
F, and Parncutt (1989) incorporated the predicted
salience of MFs at non-chord pitches in a model of pitchcommonality , intended to account for harmonic rela-
tionships perceived between successive chords such as
CEG (with MFs at D, F, and A) and DFA (with MFs at G
and B /flat). A theory of harmony based on the perception
of harmonic patterns among the partials of complex
sounds is promising, considering the biological impor-
tance of voiced speech sounds (Bowling & Purves, 2015;
Bowling, Purves, & Gill, 2017). It is also possible to
predict interesting structural aspects of tonality using
a pitch-commonality model that considers only spectral
pitch and ignores harmonic pitch patterns and virtual
pitch (Milne, Laney, & Sharp, 2015).
Parncutt (1989) adapted the pitch model of Terhardt
et al. (1982) for music-theoretical purposes, assigning all
input frequencies and output pitches to 12 equally spaced
categories per octave across the range of hearing (120
categories altogether). For a given input sound, repre-
sented as a sum of pure tones with different frequencies
and amplitudes, the model estimated the perceptual
salience of each audible partial, looked for harmonic pat-
terns among these spectral pitches (i.e., among the per-
ceived pitches of individual audible partials)3and on that
basis estimated the perceptual salience of virtual pitches.
Relevant predictions are shown in Table 1. The pre-
dictions were made using the model of Parncutt (1989),
based on simple assumptions about mutual masking
and harmonic pattern recognition among simultaneous
partials. The free parameter settings in the model were
kM¼18, k T¼3, and k S¼0.5. Parameter k Mis the
gradient of the masking pattern of a pure tone in dB per
critical band; if it is high, there is less masking and the
partials are more clearly audible. Parameter k Tis a mea-
sure of how analytically tones are perceived; if it is high,
one is more likely to experience spectral than virtual
pitches. Parameter k Smeasures the tendency to hear
2A pitch at an MF is always a virtual pitch, but not all virtual pitches
are at MFs. The pitch at or near the fundamental of a HCT, in which the
fundamental is present and audible, is usually virtual. But if the spectral
pitch of the lowest partial is more salient than the coinciding virtual pitch,
as in some high-pitched musical sounds, the main pitch is spectral.3A spectral pitch is the pitch of a pure tone—whether heard in
isolation or as part of a complex sound, as a partial. Like any other
pitch, spectral pitch is fundamentally subjective and experiential in
nature, because empirical pitch judgments are always mediated by the
listener’s consciousness (Terhardt, 1998). In a common procedure for
pitch judgment, a listener hears a complex sound and a pure tone in
alternation and adjusts the frequency of the pure tone until the two
sounds have the same pitch. The physiological correlates of spectral
pitch in the peripheral auditory system are complex; both spectral and
virtual pitch depend in general on a mixture of temporal and spectral
information and processes (Moore, 2003). If we ignore physiology and
consider only the relationship bet ween spectral pitches and partial
frequencies, the relationship is still complex: spectral pitches and
corresponding spectral frequencies differ from each other depending
on the sound levels of the partials and the degree to which they mask
each other (pitch shifts). If a partial is completely masked, its spectral
pitch ceases to exist.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 407

## Page 3

multiple tones; if it is high, more tones are perceived
simultaneously.
The model predicts features of tone profiles of isolated
chords constructed from either octave-complex tones
(OCTs; cf. empirical data of Parncutt, 1993) or
harmonic-complex tones (HCTs; cf. Reichweger, 2010;
Thompson & Parncutt, 1997).4Such profiles may
depend on experience of statistical distributions in music
(Pearce & Wiggins, 2012)—which chromas5typically
precede or follow given chords in musical scores or per-
formances. In the following, we will refer to musical
l e a r n i n gp r o c e s s e so ft h i sk i n da s‘ ‘ n u r t u r e ’ ’b ycomparison to more universal or innate aspects of pitch
perception, which we will call ‘‘nature.’’ The distinction is
problematic: virtual pitch perception according to Ter-
hardt et al. (1982) is universally learned from voiced
sounds in speech and hence a form of ‘‘nurture,’’ but the
relationship between spectral and virtual pitches is often
treated as ‘‘nature’’ because of its quasi-universality. Note
also that the dichotomy between ‘‘psychoacoustic’’ (or
‘‘sensory’’) and ‘‘cognitive’’ approaches to musical pitch
structures is not the same as the nature-nurture distinc-
tion; both approaches involve both psychophysics (rela-
tionships between physical and experiential parameters)
and cognition (information processing) (Parncutt, 1989).
The current study aimed to evaluate the relative impor-
tance of nature and nurture in the perception of non-
chord tones by comparing predictions of simple models
with empirical data. We measured the chroma salience
profiles of diverse musical chords in common use, com-
paring the results of different empirical methods and the
predictions of different predictive models. A chroma
salience profile is a vector of 12 numbers, each represent-
ing the perceptual salience of a chroma. A chroma
salience profile of a chord is a representation of the
pitches perceived in the chord and their relative saliences.
In Experiment 1, listeners heard a chord followed by
at o n ea n dr a t e dh o ww e l lt h et o n ew e n tw i t ht h e
chord—similar to experiments reported in Krumhansl
(1990), but without a preceding tonal context. From
a musical perspective, this method is suitable for testing
theories of chord-scale compatibility or mappings (Biles,
2003). In Experiment 2, listeners were asked whether the
tone was in the chord. In Experiment 3, they could hear
the chord and any of 12 chromatic tones by clicking on
an interface, and chose the chord’s clearest or main
pitch. In Experiments 1 and 2, our analysis focused onTABLE 1. Predicted Chroma-salience Profiles of Four Common Chords Constructed From Two Different Kinds of Tone According to Parncutt
(1989)
Chord Tone type C C/sharp/D /flat DD/sharp/E /flat EF F/sharp/G /flat GG/sharp/A /flat AA/sharp/B /flat B
Major
(e.g., CEG)HCT 0.87 0.01 0.19 0.03 0.66 0.09 0.01 0.64 0.05 0.15 0.03 0.12
OCT 1.62 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.55 0.17 0.01 0.58 0.06 0.16 0.01 0.00
Minor
(e.g., CE /flatG)HCT 0.81 0.01 0.09 0.65 0.03 0.19 0.02 0.74 0.17 0.03 0.21 0.05
OCT 1.34 0.01 0.02 1.09 0.00 0.32 0.00 0.79 0.32 0.02 0.01 0.06
Suspended
(e.g., CFG)HCT 0.88 0.03 0.17 0.07 0.03 0.73 0.00 0.66 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.02
OCT 1.34 0.05 0.02 0.11 0.00 1.35 0.00 0.72 0.07 0.01 0.16 0.00
Diminished
(e.g., CE /flatG/flat)HCT 0.56 0.11 0.08 0.67 0.04 0.13 0.66 0.09 0.28 0.04 0.26 0.18
OCT 1.08 0.02 0.23 0.93 0.02 0.31 1.11 0.00 0.71 0.00 0.02 0.49
Note: The OCTs have flat spectra; the amplitude envelopes of the HCTs are musically typical as specified in Parncutt (1989). The chords from HCTs are in clos e root position in
middle register and the lowest tone is always C4 (e.g., C4E4G4). The numbers in the table are predicted chroma salience, calculated by summing virtual pitch salience across 10
octave registers, for both OCT- and HCT-chords. For example, the value at C is the sum of calculated virtual pitch salience at C0, C1, C2, ...and C9. Virtual pitch salience is
normalized such that the sum of all calculated values across all 120 pitches (12/octave x 10 octaves) equals the chord’s calculated multiplicity—the predicted number of
simultaneously perceived pitches, which for example is 2.86 for the major triad of HCTs and 3.27 for the major triad of OCTs. Numbers in bold indicate ch ord tones; italics
indicate the main MFs.
4In music theory, a ‘‘chord’’ is often a familiar triad or seventh chord, or
a sonority constructed according to the principle of stacked thirds. But the
word ‘‘chord’’ may also refer to any simultaneity of any tones from the
chromatic scale, which is how we use the word in this paper. Our definition
is consistent with polyphonic musical practice since the Middle Ages, in
which almost all possible pitch-class sets were used (Parncutt et al., 2018).
It is also consistent with the idea of additive harmony in early modernism
(Bla¨ttler, 2017) and the jazz-theory concept of bitonal chords that combine
lower and upper structures (Pease & Pullig, 2001). Alternative terms for
‘‘chord’’ in this sense include ‘‘simultaneity’’ or ‘‘sonority.’’ An OCT is
a complex tone whose partials are spaced at octave intervals across the
audible spectrum. Shepard tones are OCTs whose amplitude envelope is
bell-shaped. In this study, the amplitude envelope of OCTs was flat before
amplification; low and high frequencies were instead attenuated by a mix-
ture of acoustical phenomena (frequency response of sound card and
headphones) and psychoacoustical phenomena (auditory threshold,
curves of equal loudness, and masking).
5We distinguish between pitch and chroma. Pitch is the perceived
height of a tone on a one-dimensional scale from low to high. Chroma
is octave-generalized, musically categorized pitch. There are 12 chromas:
C, C/sharp/D /flat, D, etc. Each chroma can be realized in different octave registers.
A chroma is also a psychological category: in a musical context based on
the chromatic scale, pitches lying within roughly a quartertone of a chro-
ma’s centre pitch are perceived as belonging to that chroma (cf. Burns &
Ward, 1978). A ‘‘chord chroma’’ is a chroma corresponding to one of the
chord’s notes; other chromas are ‘‘non-chord tones.’’408 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 4

non-chord tones (i.e., the nine chromas that did not
correspond to chord tones), whereas in Experiment 3,
we focused on the three chord tones. By comparing
results using different methods, we aimed to shed light
on the psychological nature and musical function of
chords and hence on the major-minor tonal system.
Like Krumhansl (1990), our study was confined to
chords constructed from OCTs. This strategy allowed
us to eliminate confounds of pitch register and chord
voicing and made it possible to demonstrate or falsify
the psychological reality of weaker pitches6(less salient
chromas) by statistical comparison of ratings across
a finite number of pitches. For example, the strategy
enabled us to ask whether chromas F and A (predicted
MFs) are evoked by the chord CEG, by comparing rat-
ings for those two tones with seven other non-chord
tones (C/sharp/D /flat, D, etc.).
Analogous experiments using chords of HCTs (Reich-
weger, 2010) suffered from a confound: the greater was
the overall perceived pitch distance between test sound
and probe tone, the lower was the goodness-of-fit rating.
In practice, this confound can be reduced, but not elim-
inated, by careful choice of test sounds and probe tones.
In general, when a listener is asked to compare a test
sound with a probe tone (e.g., for goodness of fit), results
depend on both pitch commonality and pitch distance
(Parncutt, 1989). The distinction is assumed to depend
on categorical pitch perception (Burns & Ward, 1978):
pitch commonality is higher when a greater number of
(more salient) successive pitches are perceived to lie in
thesame pitch categories, whereas pitch distance is
higher when the distance between (more salient) succes-
sive pitches in different categories is higher.
Parncutt (1989) demonstrated the psychological real-
ity of selected non-chord pitches in chords of HCTs, but
those pitches were octave-equivalent to chord tones: for
example, the chord C4E4G4 was shown to evoke pitches
at C3, G3, C5, and G5. To demonstrate the psycholog-
ical reality of non-chord chromas, one would have to
average over all inversions of each chord as well as
musically typical spectral envelopes, spacings, and regis-
tral distributions, greatly increasing the number of
experimental trials. These methodological difficulties
evaporate when both test sound and probe tone are
constructed from OCTs, such that the overall perceivedpitch distance between test and probe is held approxi-
mately constant.
PREDICTORS AND MODELS
In the present study, we measured chroma-salience
profiles for several musically typical chords and com-
pared them with four predictors: one ‘‘nature’’ predictor
(MFs) and three ‘‘nurture’’ predictors (diatonicity, 5th
relations, and completion tones). The models are intro-
duced here and later operationalized in Table 5 and
accompanying text.
Missing fundamentals. In the spectrum of a typical
musical chord, patterns of spectral pitches (audible par-
tials) may correspond to incomplete harmonic series. In
general, pitch may be perceived at the fundamentals of
such patterns (Ritsma, 1967). Empirical research on
categorical perception of partial frequencies within
complex tones (Moore, Peters, & Glasberg, 1985) sug-
gests that these harmonic patterns need not be exact and
can be mistuned by a few tens of cents (Terhardt et al.,
1982). The inherently approximate nature of pitch
intervals in memory, both in this case and in music,
undermines the Pythagorean concept of musical inter-
vals as frequency ratios (Parncutt & Hair, 2018).
Predictions about pitch perception in musical chords
should therefore be almost independent of variations
among theoretical tuning systems such as Pythagorean
and Pure/Just (Barbour, 1951).
Diatonic and chromatic representations of the har-
monic series are provided for reference in Table 2. In
a first approximation, consider only harmonics that are
octave-equivalent to the fundamental (harmonic num-
bers 1, 2, 4, 8, etc.). In this case, and considering only
fundamental frequencies of chord tones, the major triad
CEG may evoke MFs at A, F and D. An MF is predicted
at A, for example, because E corresponds to the 3rd
harmonic and G to the 7th harmonic of A. In other
words, the MFs are subharmonics of chord tones. Sim-
ilarly, the minor triad ACE evokes MFs at D and F. In
general, the larger the number of coinciding subharmo-
nics at a given pitch, and the lower the harmonic num-
bers involved, the more salient is the predicted pitch
(Terhardt et al., 1982).
Note that the predictions of spectral and temporal
models of pitch perception are similar to each other due
to the mathematical equivalence of time- and
frequency-domain representations; our aim here is not
to compare pitch models or approaches with each other,
but to test predictions that are common to different
models. Note also that the tendency to perceive pitch
at the MF in isolated tones is subject to large individual6A ‘‘pitch’’ is a subjective experience. This definition applies equally to
spectral and virtual pitch. An experimental psychoacoustic paradigm
explores quantitative relationships between experiential parameters
such as pitch, timbre and loudness on the one hand, and physical
parameters such as the frequencies, amplitudes, and relative phases of
partials within complex tones on the other.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 409

## Page 5

differences (Schneider et al., 2005; Seither-Preisler,
Johnson, Seither, & Lu ¨tkenho ¨ner, 2008): fundamental
listeners are more likely to hear pitches at MFs, whereas
spectral listeners are less likely to do so.
Diatonicity. The standard diatonic scale or set corre-
sponds to the white keys on the modern piano and
comprises seven chromas (C, D, E, F, G, A, and B), in
any transposition and any musically typical or accept-
able tuning. It represents a closed segment of the circle of
5ths, all tones being related to at least one other tone by
a P4 or P5 interval. Most types of chords in the major-
minor system can be played (in transposition) in this
scale. Sometimes the same type of chord can be played
at more than one position within the scale. For instance,
in the key of C major, there are major triads on C, F, and
G, and minor triads on D, E and A. Diatonic scales are
highly familiar to Western listeners (Deutsch & Feroe,
1981), having dominated Western music since ancient
times (Gauldin, 1983). If a chord is a subset of the stan-
dard diatonic scale, listeners may expect to hear other
tones in the same scale in the music that follows.
5th relations. On the circle of 5ths, chromatic pitches are
assigned to a circular representation similar to a clock
face: C at 12 o’clock, G at 1 o’clock, D at 2 o’clock, and
so on. There is convergent evidence in the literature for
the psychological reality of this construct (Bharucha,
1987; Krumhansl, 1990, 1991; Lerdahl, 1988; Shepard,
1982; Thompson & Cuddy, 1989). In a tonal musical
context, when any tone is heard, other tones at P4 or
P5 intervals above or below it may be expected (cogni-
tively activated or facilitated). This idea is plausible
given the central role of diatonic scales based on P8 and
P5 intervals in Western tonal music. But this observa-
tion also means our diatonicity and 5th-relatedness pre-
dictors overlap. They also overlap with the MF
predictor, because many MFs lie at P5 intervals below
chord tones.Completion tones. Any chord of 3 chromas (trichord)
can be transformed into a chord of 4 chromas (tetra-
chord) by adding one of the 9 other chromas. For exam-
ple, a diminished triad can be turned into a dominant,
diminished, or half-diminished 7th chord, or six other
less familiar tone combinations, by adding a fourth
tone. The relative prevalence (frequency of occurrence)
of those 9 tetrachords in real music depends mainly on
their consonance (Parncutt & Hair, 2011). If a tetrachord
is prevalent and hence familiar, each of its four triadic
subsets may be perceived as the tetrachord with a miss-
ing element—just as a familiar pattern can be recog-
nized when elements are missing (Gestalt principle of
closure). A listener may therefore expect to hear the
missing tone. Our completion tone predictor again par-
tially overlaps with the other predictors, because com-
pletion tones often lie at P4/P5 intervals from chord
tones, create a harmonic pattern corresponding to part
of the harmonic series, or create part of a diatonic scale.
To understand better how these four predictors over-
lap, consider a simple example. Parncutt (1993, Exper-
iment 2) presented chords of octave-complex tones
(OCTs) followed by single octave-complex probe tones.
When the chord was a C-major triad (CEG), partici-
pants rated the probe tone F as sounding or fitting
significantly better than F/sharp. Of the four proposed mod-
els, three might explain this result. In the MF model, F is
an MF in a C-major triad but F/sharpis not. Regarding dia-
tonicity, F is diatonic in two scales to which the triad
belongs (C major and F major), whereas F/sharpis diatonic in
only one (G major). Regarding 5th relations, F lies a 5th
away from a chord tone (C) but F/sharpdoes not. Only the
fourth model (completion tones) cannot explain
this particular result: neither CEFG nor CEF/sharpG is a par-
ticularly familiar tetrachord, although both do occur
occasionally in tonal music. Thus, we are unable to
separate the theories on the basis of this example.
Three of the models—diatonicity, 5th relations, and
completion tones—presumably involve musicalTABLE 2. The Harmonic Series in Diatonic and Chromatic Representations Relative to an Arbitrary Fundamental Frequency of 110 Hz (the
Musical Note A2)
Harmonic no. 1234567891 0
Frequencies (relative to 110 Hz) 110 220 330 440 550 660 770 880 990 1100
Note names (relative to A2) A2 A3 E4 A4 C/sharp5E 5 G 5A 5B 5C/sharp6
Simple diatonic intervals P1 P1 P5 P1 M3 P5 m7 P1 M2 M3
Chromatic intervals in semitones 007047 1 002 4
Note: The numbers following the note names in row 3 are octave registers (middle C is the lowest tone of register 4). Abbreviations for diatonic intervals ro w 4 are P ¼perfect,
M¼major, m ¼minor, 1 ¼unison, 3 ¼third, 5 ¼fifth, 7 ¼seventh. The intervals in the last two lines are relative to the lowest tone or fundamental. They are octave
generalized; that is, expressed as simple rather than compound intervals (using modulo 12 arithmetic for chromatic intervals). Note that the tuning of the harmonic series
differs from 12-tone equal temperament and piano keyboards; the largest deviation occurs at the 7th harmonic, where a ratio of 4:7 is 31 cents smaller t han an equally tempered
m7 interval (10 semitones).410 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 6

learning (‘‘nurture’’); that is, experience of pitch-time
patterns in music and their statistical regularities (Parn-
cutt, Reisinger, Fuchs, & Kaiser, 2018). If the tone F
often follows a C-major chord (or more generally, if
a major triad is often followed by a tone a P4 above the
root7) in the music to which we have been exposed, we
are likely to indicate in an experiment that F is a good
continuation to C major—regardless of whether F is
also a MF. Here and elsewhere, the prevalence of musi-
cal patterns (such as any major triad followed by a tone
a P4 above the root) can be estimated by statistical
analysis of representative databases of musical scores;
such analysis can then predict note-by-note expectan-
cies (cf. Pearce & Wiggins, 2012).
With the contrasting—but also overlapping—predic-
tions of these four models in mind, the experiments
were designed to answer questions such as: Do funda-
mental listeners rate MFs in musical chords higher than
spectral listeners? Are the tone profiles more peaked,
and the ratings higher on average, for more familiar
chords? Does the highest peak correspond to the root?
Are there peaks among the nine non-chord tones? If so,
which model or models predict them?
Method
OVERVIEW
Each participant participated in one preliminary exper-
iment and three main experiments in a single session in
a quiet room at the University of Graz. Each experiment
comprised a series of trials whose order was random
and different for each participant. Each began with a few
practice trials. The order of the three main experiments
was random for each participant. The preliminary
experiment was the Auditory Ambiguity Test (AAT)
of Seither-Preisler et al. (2007), which aimed to separate
participants into fundamen tal and spectral listeners.
After completing the experi ments, participants com-
mented briefly on their experience of participating, their
strategies, and the chords that they recognized. Statisti-
cal tests were performed in SPSS 22.
PARTICIPANTS
Forty people (26 females) participated in all experi-
ments: 16 musicology students (University of Graz), 8students of a musical instrument, composition, or con-
ducting (University of Music and Performing Arts
Graz), 6 electrical and audio engineering students (Graz
University of Technology), 7 students in other disci-
plines, and 3 non-students. The age range was 18 to
57 years ( M¼25,SD¼7).
All participants were musicians with over 6 years
experience of regular instrumental playing and/or sing-
ing (mean number of years of playing ¼14,SD¼5;
mean singing ¼7,SD¼7). Most (78 %) indicated that
they were playing an instrument regularly; of the sing-
ers, most (63 %) indicated they were singing regularly.
The main instrument of 7 participants was the piano, of
7 the guitar, of 5 the flute, and of 3 each the trumpet and
the violin. As a second instrument, the piano was men-
tioned most often (13 times). Most participants (26)
named classical music as their main performance genre;
further genres (in descending order) were traditional
music, jazz, pop, and rock. Two participants gave sing-
ing as their main instrument and 31 reported they were
singing in a choir.
Nonmusicians were not included because of the dif-
ficulty of the experimental task. A previous, comparable
study (Reichweger, 2010) had found that nonmusicians
were often unable to differentiate between chord tones
and non-chord tones in familiar musical triads.
STIMULI
All sounds were electronically synthesized. They were
either pure tones, HCTs with MFs, OCTs, or chords
of OCTs.
In each trial of the preliminary experiment (AAT),
participants heard two successive HCTs with MFs, in
which MFs and spectral components moved in opposite
direction: if the spectral components of the second
sound were higher, the MF was lower, and vice versa.
The task was to indicate whether the second tone was
higher or lower than the first. Each tone comprised
successive harmonics spanning one octave. In some
tone pairs, the tone with the higher F0 had harmonic
numbers 2-4 and the tone with the lower F0 had har-
monics 5-10. In others, the higher tone had harmonics
3-6 and the lower had 7-14; in still others, 4-8 and 9-18.
The gradient of the spectral envelope was always -6 dB
per octave—comparable with a bowed string (e.g., vio-
lin). Each HCT had the same SPL before amplification
and realization; overall loudness was adjusted to be
comfortable. The frequency of the missing F0 was
between 100 and 400 Hz. The interval between the MFs
was familiar from Western music (major second or M2,
major third or M3, perfect 5th or P5, major 6th, or M6).
Both tone durations and the silent gaps between them7In a psychological approach, the root is a reference chroma, relative
to which other chord chromas are often or usually perceived. Major and
minor triads appear most often in root position (i.e., with the root in the
bass). Chord roots are often ambiguous, but the assumed root usually
corresponds to the lower tone of a P5 interval between chord chromas (or
the upper tone of a P4).Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 411

## Page 7

were 500 ms. Test presentation and response analysis
were performed by an automatized Visual Basic script.
In the three main experiments, in each trial partici-
pants heard a chord of OCTs followed by a single OCT
or pure tone. The OCTs corresponded to the 12 steps of
the equally tempered chromatic scale with A4 ¼440 Hz
and unstretched octaves (2:1). Each OCT comprised 10
partials of equal amplitude (before amplification); the
frequency range was from C1 (32.7 Hz) to B10 (15800
Hz). The relative phase of the partials was randomized:
each was phase-shifted by a random angle between -
180/C14andþ180/C14before superposition, to eliminate the
possibility that phase relationships might affect the rel-
ative salience of evoked pitches. The amplitude of each
chord was adjusted to -0.5 dB relative to full scale. To
avoid clicks, amplitude-linear ramps were applied to the
start (10 ms) and end (30 ms) of each sound.
For the first 20 participants in the three main experi-
ments, the chord of OCTs had a duration of 300 ms, the
silence between the chord and the probe tone was 300
ms, and the probe tone was an OCT whose amplitude
was the same as that of the chord and whose duration
was 300 ms. For the second group of 20 participants
(numbered 21 to 40), the chord of OCTs had a duration
of 100 ms, the silence was 300 ms as before, and the
probe tone was a pure tone whose pitch was randomly
distributed over a two-octave range from F4 (349 Hz)
to E6 (1320 Hz). The amplitude of the pure tone was
the same as that of the corresponding partial within the
chord, and its duration was 200 ms. These changes
were intended to be exploratory; we did not indepen-
dently manipulate duration and probe tone type (OCT
versus pure).
EQUIPMENT
Sounds were presented using a DELL Optiplex 960
computer with Intel1Core™2D u oC P UE 8 4 0 0@3G H z ,
Windows 7 64-Bit operati ng system, 8GB RAM, and
ADI 1984A High Definition Audio Onboard Graphic
Card. The sound signal was amplified using Samson
C-control mixer-amplifier and sent to Beyerdynamics
DT-100 closed headphones. ‘‘Octave’’ open-source soft-
ware was used both to synthesize the sounds and run the
experiment.
Auditory Ambiguity Test (AAT)
PROCEDURE
This preliminary test comprised 110 trials, in a different
random order for each participant. In each trial, two
successive HCTs with MFs were presented. In 100
ambiguous trials the spectral envelope and the MFalways moved in opposite directions. In 10 unambigu-
ous control trials, both the MF and the spectral envelope
moved in the same direction, to test the participants’
reliability. Subjects with two or more incorrectly classi-
fied control trials were discarded. Participants were not
informed about the structure of the sounds; they simply
indicated whether the pitch rose or fell. Participants
who commented that they were sometimes unsure of
the direction of motion were asked to give spontaneous
‘‘gut reactions.’’ Each participant was given a score
between 0 and 100, representing the number of trials
in which her or his response corresponded to the move-
ment of the MF. Consistently spectral listeners had
scores near 0, while consistently fundamental listeners
had scores near 100.
RESULTS
The mean score was 81.8 ( SD¼20)—comparable with
the score of 81.6 for professional musicians of Seither-
Preisler et al. (2008), who also found mean scores of
45.9 for nonmusicians and 61.6 for amateur musicians.
According to the original criteria of the AAT (score of 0-
50, spectral listener; 50-100, fundamental listener;
Seither-Preisler et al., 2007), most of our participants
were fundamental listeners. We divided our 40 partici-
pants into two equal groups relative to the median value
of 90.5 (the distribution was not bimodal). The cutoff
value was arbitrary; in general, it depends on the acous-
tic parameters of the stimuli such that HCTs with higher
harmonic numbers and fewer successive harmonics
increase the likelihood of spectral responses (Preisler,
1993). The 20 participants with lower AAT scores were
labeled relatively spectral listeners (mean score: 66.5);
the 20 with higher scores were relatively fundamental
listeners (mean score: 97.1). The difference between the
two means was significant ( p< .001; we used the Mann-
Whitney U-test, since the distributions were skewed).
We assume that our relatively fundamental listeners
consistently heard the pitch of an isolated HCT at the
MF, whereas our relatively spectral listeners sometimes
responded to spectral and sometimes to virtual pitch.
Experiment 1
PROCEDURE
In each trial, a chord of OCTs and a probe tone were
heard in succession. Participants were asked to rate how
well the tone went with the chord on a 7-point scale
from very badly to very good ( Wie gut passt der Ton zum
Akkord? 1 ¼sehr schlecht, 7 ¼sehr gut ). The experi-
menter explained that the task was comparable with the
question ‘‘How well do two colors go with each other?’’412 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 8

and compared that question with how well the colors
went with each other in a picture hanging on the wall.
The experimenter encouraged participants to respond
to each trial quickly and spontaneously, and clarified
that we valued their opinion and there were no clearly
defined right or wrong answers. Some participants
asked whether they should judge whether the tone
would go together with the chord if it sounded simul-
taneously (even though it was presented successively);
the experimenter avoided giving a clear answer to this
question and instead asked participants to respond
spontaneously on the basis of the sound, without think-
ing about music theory. If a participant interested in the
aesthetics of new or atonal music claimed that every
tone might go equally well with every chord, the exper-
imenter repeated the instruction to respond to the
sound itself as experienced.
In a series of 108 trials, 9 chords and 12 chromatic
tones were presented in all combinations.8Relative to
an arbitrary reference chroma (0), the chords were 015
(e.g., CD /flatF), 025 (CDF), 027 (sus ¼suspended 4th
chord), 035 (e.g., CE /flatF), 036 (dim ¼diminished triad),
037 (min ¼minor), 045 (e.g., CEF), 047 (maj ¼major),
and 048 (aug ¼augmented). The arbitrary reference
was randomly transposed around the chroma circle in
each trial. The chords had been selected from all 19
possible Tn-types of cardinality 3 (Forte, 1973; Rahn,
1980), as illustrated in Figure 1. The first eight selected
chords were the most common trichords in Renaissance
polyphony according to a database analysis (Parncutt
et al., 2018; see Figure 2).9The selection reflected our
goal to understand the historical emergence of major-
minor tonality: we wanted to focus on pitch perception
in chords that played an important role in that historical
development. The last chord was a special case from
which unusual results might be expected, and it
increased the diversity and dissonance of the sounds
to which participants were exposed. The augmented
triad 048 is symmetrical and hence tonally ambiguous:it divides the octave, and hence the chroma circle, into
three equal intervals of four semitones.
HYPOTHESES
On the basis of previous research, we made the follow-
ing predictions.
H1. Relatively fundamental listeners rate MFs in
musical chords higher than relatively spectral
listeners.
H2. The main peaks in the profile for each chord cor-
respond to the 3 chord tones. Thus, empirical
profiles correlate with stimulus profiles, with 1 for
each chord tone and 0 for the other 9 chromas.
H3. The difference between chord tones and non-
chord tones is larger for more familiar chords.
If so, a possible explanation is that Western lis-
teners have more practice making such distinc-
tions in such chords.
H4. The mean rating over all 12 probe tones is higher
for more familiar or consonant chords. Goodness
of fit can be regarded as a horizontal (successive)
consonance judgment; listeners often cannot sep-
arate different kinds of consonance (Parncutt &
Hair, 2011).
H5. Among the 3 chord tones, the highest peak cor-
responds to the conventional root. For most
chords, that was the upper tone of a P4 interval.
H6. Ratings vary among the 9 chromas not corre-
sponding to chord tones, enabling a comparison
of the four listed models (MFs, diatonicity, 5th
relations, completion tones).
RESULTS
We made a preliminary, exploratory test of whether the
data might depend on chord duration or tone type by
comparing the results of the first group of 20 partici-
pants (who heard longer chords and OCT probes) with
those of the second group of 20 (shorter chords and
pure probes). Although our experiment resembles
a two-way repeated measures design with independent
FIGURE 1. Nineteen Tn-types of cardinality 3 according to Rahn (1980),
in close position with C4 in the lowest voice. Trichords with familiar
music-theoretical names have been labeled: sus ¼suspended triad
(here, a G chord with suspended 4 th, also called Gsus4), dim ¼
diminished, min ¼minor, maj ¼major, aug ¼augmented.
8At first sight, this seems like a two-way repeated measures design with
independent variables Chord (9 levels) and Chroma (12 levels). It is not,
because a main effect of the circular (modulo 12) variable Chroma would
be meaningless: each chord has a different profile and is randomly trans-
posed relative to the others. In this simple, non-standard design, each chord
is statistically independent of the other chords, so regardless of the number
of tested chords there is no need to correct for multiple comparisons.
9Chord 015 (e.g., E-F-A) combines a consonant P4/P5 interval (5
semitones) with a dissonant m2 (1 semitone) and an intermediate M3
(4 semitones). In modern (tonal) terminology, it can be a minor triad (on
D) with suspended or passing M9 (on E). In early music, it can be a M3
interval (FA) with a passing M7 (E), or a P5 interval (AE) with a passing
m6 (F). In Figure 2, this dissonant tone combination is almost always
prepared (i.e., the tones do not begin simultaneously).Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 413

## Page 9

variables Chord (9 levels) and Chroma (12 levels), it is
not; each chord is statistically independent of the other
chords, as each chord has a different profile and is ran-
domly transposed relative to the others. Therefore,
repeated-measures analy ses of variance (ANOVAs)
were calculated for each chord separately with factors
Group (2) and Chroma (12); results are shown in
Table 3. Given our stance on the statistical indepen-
dence of chords from one another we did not consider
corrections for multiple comparisons necessary. There
was no main effect of Group and no interaction between
Chroma and Group for any of the chords, which justi-
fied averaging the results of the two groups in later
analyses. We did not systematically investigate the effect
of chord duration or tone type.
Results are presented in Figure 3. The bottom right
panel of Figure 3 is a special case. The augmented triad
048 (e.g., CEG/sharp) is symmetrical: the intervals between
adjacent tones are all 4 semitones. For this reason, and
because the chord was constructed from OCTs, the
stimuli presented to the participants for probe pitches
0 to 3 were physically identical (because transposed
around the chroma circle) to the stimuli presented for
probe pitches 4 to 7, and for probe pitches 8 to 11.
FIGURE 2. Distribution of chords corresponding to 19 Tn types of cardinality 3 (trichords) in a database of musical scores of unaccompanied choral
polyphony from the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries (Parncutt et al., 2018). A new “chord” was identified at every onset in any voice. White bars:
Prepared chords, in which one or more notes are held from the previous chord. Black bars: Unprepared chords, in which all onsets are simultaneous.
TABLE 3. Repeated-measures Analyses of Variance of Results of
Experiment 1 for Each Chord Separately with Factors Group (2) and
Chroma (12)
Chord Main effect of GroupInteraction between
Group and Chroma
015 F(1, 38)¼0.13,p¼.91,
Z2¼.000F(11, 418) ¼0.98,p¼.47,
Z2¼.025
045 F(1, 38)¼0.01,p¼.93,
Z2¼.000F(11, 418) ¼1.10,p¼.36,
Z2¼.028
025 F(1, 38)¼0.02,p¼.89,
Z2¼.001F(11, 418) ¼1.26,p¼.24,
Z2¼.032
035 F(1, 38)¼0.05,p¼.83,
Z2¼.001F(11, 418) ¼0.68,p¼.76,
Z2¼.017
027 F(1, 38)¼1.77,p¼.19,
Z2¼.045F(11, 418) ¼0.54,p¼.87,
Z2¼.014
036 F(1, 38)¼0.75,p¼.39,
Z2¼.019F(11, 418) ¼0.67,p¼.77,
Z2¼.017
037 F(1, 38)¼0.49,p¼.49,
Z2¼.013F(11, 418) ¼1.07,p¼.39,
Z2¼.027
047 F(1, 38)¼0.75,p¼.39,
Z2¼.019F(11, 418) ¼0.93,p¼.51,
Z2¼.024
048 F(1, 38)¼0.55,p¼.46,
Z2¼.014F(11, 418) ¼1.13,p¼.34,
Z2¼.029
Note: Group 1 was the first group of 20 participants (with longer stimulus durations)
and Group 2 was the second group (with shorter durations).414 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 10

Results were therefore averaged across these three
groups of trials. The error bars are smaller than for the
other chords because they represent the means of 120
rather than 40 data per point.
H1 was not confirmed: relatively fundamental listen-
ers did not generally rate MFs higher than relatively
spectral listeners. For each chord, results were subjected
to a repeated-measures ANOVA with factors Listener
Type (2 levels: relatively fundamental, relatively spectral)
and Chroma (9 levels; the three chord tones were omit-
ted). This was possible given that the fundamental and
spectral listener groups did not differ in variance accord-
ing to the Levene test. Results are presented in Table 4.
The effect of Listener Type was significant for only one
chord: 037 (minor). The interaction between Listener
Type and Chroma was significant for only two chords:
047 (major) and 048 (augmented). Given the lack of any
consistent, significant main or secondary effect of Lis-
tener Type, we averaged over all listeners in Figure 3.
H2 was confirmed: the main peaks in each chord
profile corresponded to chord tones. We performed
an ANOVA with factors Chord (9) and Tone (2). Tone
was set to 1 for the three chord tones and 0 for the nine
non-chord tones in each chord. The difference in mean
FIGURE 3. Results of Experiment 1. Points are mean listener ratings over 40 participants. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals. Open circles are
chord tones; filled circles are non-chord tones. Tones predicted to have higher salience are marked with letters: M: missing fundamental, D: diatoni c
tone, C: completion tone. The headings “3-4A” and so on are labels for Tn-types according to Rahn (1980); “015” means 0, 1, and 5 semitones relative to
an arbitrary reference pitch.
TABLE 4. Repeated-measures Analyses of Variance of Results of
Experiment 1 for Each Chord Separately with Factors Group (2) and
Chroma (12)
Chord Main effect of GroupInteraction between
Group and Chroma
015 F(1, 38)¼0.35,p¼.56,
Z2¼.009F(8, 304) ¼1.53,p¼.15,
Z2¼.039
045 F(1, 38)¼0.39,p¼.53,
Z2¼.010F(8, 304) ¼0.39,p¼.93,
Z2¼.010
025 F(1, 38)¼2.41,p¼.13,
Z2¼.060F(8, 304) ¼1.13,p¼.34,
Z2¼.029
035 F(1, 38)¼0.34,p¼.57,
Z2¼.009F(8, 304) ¼0.86,p¼.55,
Z2¼.022
027 F(1, 38)¼0.87,p¼.36,
Z2¼.022F(8, 304) ¼1.11,p¼.35,
Z2¼.028
036 F(1, 38)¼0.09,p¼.77,
Z2¼.002F(8, 304) ¼0.76,p¼.64,
Z2¼.020
037 F(1, 38)¼5.20,p< .05,
Z2¼.120F(8, 304) ¼0.89,p¼.53,
Z2¼.023
047 F(1, 38)¼0.41,p¼.52,
Z2¼.011F(8, 304) ¼2.14,p< .05,
Z2¼.053
048 F(1, 38)¼0.08,p¼.78,
Z2¼.002F(8, 304) ¼2.51,p< .05,
Z2¼.062
Note: Group 1 was relatively fundamental listeners and Group 2 was relatively
spectral listeners.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 415

## Page 11

rating between chord and non-chord tones was com-
pared across 9 chords. There was a main effect of Tone:
responses for chord tones were higher than for non-
chord tones (H2), F(1, 39)¼85.72, p< .001, Z2¼.69.
H3 was also confirmed: participants could more eas-
ily distinguish chord tones from non-chord tones in
more familiar (consonant) chords. In the same ANOVA
with factors Chord and Tone, the effect of Tone was
greater for chord 047 (maj) than all other chords except
chords 027 (sus) and 037 (min), F(8, 312) ¼5.85,p<
.001,Z2¼.13.
H4 was not confirmed: ratings were not generally
higher for more familiar or consonant chords. An
ANOVA with two factors, Chord (9 levels) and Chroma
(12), revealed a main effect of Chord, F(8, 312) ¼5.37, p
< .001, Z2¼.12, but the mean rating for a chord did not
depend in a clear way on its familiarity/consonance. In
order of mean response (from highest to lowest), the
chords were 036, 025, 037, 048, 015, 035, 047, 027, 045.
H5 was partially confirmed: the profile peak some-
times corresponded to the music-theoretic root. For
each chord separately, a one-way repeated-measures
ANOVA was applied to the ratings for the three
chord-tones, ignoring ratings at non-chord pitches.
There was a significant main effect of Chroma for four
of the nine chords: 015, 027, 037, and 047.
• For 015, the ANOVA yielded F(2, 78)¼3.16, p<
.05,Z2¼.08, but Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc
analysis produced no significant differences.
• For 027, an ANOVA with Greenhouse-Geisser
correction yielded F(1.58, 61.68) ¼4.77, p< .05,
Z2¼.11, and a Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc
analysis revealed a significant difference ( p<
.01) between tone 0 and tone 2, tone 0 receiving
higher ratings; 1.05, 95 %-CI(0.22, 1.88).
• For 037, F(2, 78)¼6.08, p< .01, Z2¼.14, a Bon-
ferroni-adjusted post hoc analysis produced a sig-
nificant difference ( p< .01) between tone 0 and
tone 3, tone 0 receiving higher ratings; 1.10, 95 %-
CI(0.43, 1.77).
• For 047, an ANOVA with a Greenhouse-Geisser
correction yielded F(1.62, 63.31) ¼10.97, p< .001,
Z2¼.22, and a Bonferroni-adjusted post hoc
analysis revealed a significant difference ( p<
.01) between tone 0 and tone 4, tone 0 receiving
higher ratings; 1.25, 95 %-CI(0.40, 2.10), tone 7
higher than tone 4; 1.13, 95 %-CI(0.35, 1.90).
While all observed differences were broadly consistent
with both typical music-theoretic positions and the pre-
dictions of Parncutt (1988) and Parncutt (1993), many
predicted differences did not reach significance. Perhapsthere was a ceiling effect, such that all three tones were
heard to go (very) well with the preceding chord.
H6 was partially confirmed. A one-way ANOVA with
9 levels yielded a main effect of Chroma among non-
chord tones for chords 015, 036, 037, 047. For 035 we
observed a trend.
• For 015, F(8, 312) ¼2.25, p< .05, Z2¼.05
• For 036, F(8, 312) ¼2.65, p< .01, Z2¼.06
• For 037, F(8, 312) ¼2.27, p< .05, Z2¼.06
• For 047 F(8, 312) ¼2.59, p< .05, Z2¼.06
• For 035, F(8, 312) ¼1.79, p< .08, Z2¼.04
There was no significant effect of Chroma among
non-chord tones for chords 025, 027, 045, or 048.
• 025: F(8, 312) ¼1.09, p¼.37,Z2¼.03
• 027: F(8, 312) ¼1.24, p¼.28,Z2¼.03
• 045: F(8, 312) ¼1.32, p¼.23,Z2¼.03
• 048: F(8, 312) ¼1.39, p¼.20,Z2¼.03
Although only half of the chords produced a significant
effect of Chroma for non-chord tones, we proceeded to
investigate predicted differences among non-chord tones
in all nine chords, looking for higher mean goodness-of-
fit ratings at predictions of four theories: MFs, diatonic
tones, 5th-related tones, and completion tones.
MODELS
Predictions of the four models for non-chord tones are
summarized in Table 5. For each chord and each of the
four theories, the first chroma in the list is the one most
strongly predicted by the theory. For example, the
strongest non-chord tone in chord 015 according to the
diatonic predictor is 3 (i.e., 3 semitones or a m3 above
the 0 in 015). The other pitches are listed in descending
order of predicted strength. If two or more pitches are
predicted to have equal strength, they are listed in rising
numerical order. This criterion was applied in the same
way to all four theoretical predictions. Exact procedures
for the four predictive models were as follows.
MFs. Predictions for MFs were chroma-salience profiles
according to Parncutt (1988) with the following root-
support weights: 10 for the P1/P8 interval, 5 for P5, 3 for
M3, 2 for m7, and 1 for M2/M9 (see Parncutt, 2009,
Appendix). The results of these calculations are pre-
sented in Table 6a, in which the two main MFs for each
chord are also marked. Table 6b presents predictions of
a similar algorithm that additionally accounts for mask-
ing among partials (Parncutt, 1993). Nearby partials
mask each other, and the smaller the interval, the higher
the degree of masking. In the chord 015, for example,
tones 0 and 1 mask each other, which reduces their416 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 12

salience relative to tone 5. Comparing parts a and b of
Table 6, we see that masking has little effect on the rank
order of predictions.
Diatonic tones. The predictions of this model were cal-
culated in two steps. First, we listed all major scales to
which each chord belonged. Second, we counted how
many of these scales each chroma belonged to, and
weighted it with this number. Chromas that belong to
the same diatonic scale(s) as a chord are marked in Figure
3 as ‘‘diatonic tones.’’ For example, the chord 015 (e.g.,CD /flatF) is part of two major scales: 0, 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10 (D /flat
major) and 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 8, 10 (A /flatmajor). We therefore
expect chromas 3, 6, 7, 8, and 10 to receive higher mean
ratings following 015 than other non-chord tones. Of
these, 3, 8, and 10 belong to both scales, so ratings for
these tones are predicted to lie between those for chord
tones (0, 1, 5) and other diatonic tones (6, 7).
5th-related tones. The first predictions listed in the
fourth column of Table 5 are tones that are 5th-related
to at least one chord tone. For each chord, between 2 andTABLE 5. Predicted Profile Peaks for Nine Non-chord Tones (in Semitones Above 0 in the Chord Label) for Each Chord in the Experiments
According to Four Different Theories, Starting with the Highest Predicted Peak in Each Case
Chord MFs Diatonic tones 5th-related tones Completion tones
015 10, 6, 3, 8, 9, 2, 4, 7, 11 3, 8, 10, 6, 7, 2, 4, 9, 11 6, 7, 8, 10, 2, 3, 4, 9, 11 8, 10, 9, 3, 7, 6, 2, 4, 11
025 10, 7, 1, 8, 4, 3, 6, 9, 11 7, 9, 10, 3, 4, 8, 11, 1, 6 7, 9, 10, 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 11 9, 8, 10, 7, 3, 4, 1, 6, 11
027 5, 10, 3, 8, 4, 9, 1, 6, 11 5, 9, 4, 10, 3, 11, 6, 8, 1 5, 9, 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11 5, 4, 10, 9, 3, 6, 1, 8, 11
035 8, 10, 1, 11, 2, 7, 4, 6, 9 10, 7, 8, 1, 2, 6, 9, 4, 11 10, 7, 8, 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 11 9, 8, 7, 10, 2, 1, 4, 6, 11
036 8, 11, 5, 2, 1, 4, 7, 9, 10 1, 5, 8, 10, 2, 4, 7, 9, 11 1, 5, 7, 8, 10, 11, 2, 4, 9 8, 10, 9, 11, 1, 7, 2, 4, 5
037 5, 8, 11, 2, 9, 1, 4, 6, 10 5, 10, 2, 8, 1, 9, 4, 6, 11 2, 5, 8, 10, 1, 4, 6, 9, 11 10, 9, 8, 2, 5, 11, 1, 4, 6
045 10, 9, 1, 2, 8, 6, 3, 7, 11 2, 7, 9, 10, 11, 1, 3, 6, 8 7, 9, 10, 11, 1, 2, 3, 6, 8 9, 8, 7, 10, 2, 11, 1, 3, 6
047 9, 5, 2, 3, 8, 6, 1, 10, 11 2, 9, 5, 11, 6, 10, 1, 3, 8 2, 5, 9, 11, 1, 3, 6, 8, 10 10, 9, 11, 2, 5, 1, 3, 6, 8
048 1, 5, 9, 2, 6, 10, 3, 7, 11 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 2, 6, 10 2, 6, 10, 3, 7, 11, 1, 5, 9
TABLE 6. Predicted Chroma-salience Profiles of 9 Tested Chords
A)
Chord in semitones Chord name 0 1 2 3 45678 9 1 0 1 1
015 – 10 1 3230 15 5 23 3 6 1
045 – 13 3 3 1 10 15 223 56 0
025 – 11 3 12 1 2 15 0 7 30 9 0
035 – 10 4 2 11 0 17 02 8 0 6 3
027 sus 16 0 12 3 2 6 0 15 32 4 0
036 dim 10 1 5 10 1 7 10 0 10 01 8
037 min 15 12 13 0 8 0 10 8 21 3
047 maj 18 033 10 6 2 10 3 7 10
048 aug 13 5 30 13 5 30 13 5 30
Note: Top row: interval in semitones relative to reference pitch 0. Body of table: Weight Waccording to Parncutt (1988, Equation 1, p. 77) with root-suppor t weights 10 (for the
P1/P8 interval), 5 (for P5), 3 (for M3), 2 (for m7), and 1 (for M2/M9). Chord tones are underlined, predicted roots are bold, and predicted MFs are italic .
B)
Chord in semitones Chord name 0 1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1
015 – 22 35 4 9 0 55 11 976 24 2
045 – 52 7 11 2 22 46 45 1 4 11 16 0
025 – 33 11 34 4 6 51 0 21 90 29 0
035 – 35 12 7 30 0 52 06 24 0 18 8
027 sus 49 0 33 11 6 18 0 51 87 11 0
036 dim 40 4 20 37 4 28 40 0 39 04 31
037 min 49 36 41 0 26 0 34 25 739
047 maj 54 099 28 18 6 29 9 20 30
048 aug 45 17 10 0 45 17 10 0 45 17 10 0
Note: Top row: interval in semitones relative to reference pitch 0. Body of table: Audibility A according to Parncutt (1993, Equation 5, p. 45) with the same root-support weights
as for part A.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 417

## Page 13

6 pitches were predicted by this method. If a tone was
5th-related to two chord tones, it was placed first in the
list. For example, in chord 025, tone 7 is 5th-related to
both tone 0 and tone 2. Finally, the remaining tones were
inserted in numerical order.
Completion tones. For each trichord in Experiment 1,
we listed the main tetrachords of which it could be part.
Consulting data on the prevalence of tetrachords in our
database (cf. Parncutt et al. 2018), we identified the
non-chord-chromas that would create a familiar tetra-
chord if added to the trichord. For example, if chro-
matic tone 10 is added to chord 015, it becomes (0, 1, 5,
10), which is a minor triad on 10 (10, 1, 5) with an
added major 9th (0). Put another way, chord 015 has
a missing root at 10. If chromatic tone 8 is added to 015,
the result is a major 7th chord relative to root 1. To
create the lists in Table 5, we subjectively estimated the
consonance or prevalence in mainstream tonal music of
the harmonic (simultaneous) tetrachord created by
adding each possible completion tone to each trichord
played on the piano. In the process we referred to our
tetrachord prevalence data, but did not use it system-
atically, because our participants were most familiar
with pop/jazz styles of the 20th century, for which we
have no comparable data. Instead, we drew subjectively
on our experience as musicians and theorists. We
assume that other music theorists will generate similar
data and that any individual differences will not bias
our final conclusions. Tetrachords that include two or
more semitone intervals (e.g., 015 plus 2, 4, or 11) were
always placed last in the list—in rising numerical order,
as before.
TESTING MODEL PREDICTIONS
We tested the predictions for MFs in Table 5 by running
an ANOVA with two repeated-measures factors: Chord
(9 levels) and MF strength (2), the latter being 1 for the
first two MFs and 0 for other pitches. There were main
effects of Chord, F(8, 312) ¼6.04, p< .001, Z2¼.13, and
MF Strength, F(1, 39)¼19.37, p<. 0 0 1 , Z2¼.33, con-
firming that the two predicted MFs (mean rating ¼4.17)
were rated higher than other seven non-chord tones
(mean ¼3.80). The interaction was not significant.
To test the predictions for diatonic tones in the table,
the factors were Chord and Diatonicity (non-chord dia-
tonic chromas versus other non-chord tones). The com-
parison was limited to eight chords (the non-diatonic
augmented triad was omitted). Both main effects were
significant: Chord, F(7, 273) ¼5.78, p< .001, Z2¼.13,
and Diatonicity, F(1, 39)¼4.79, p< .05, Z2¼.11, with
means of 3.95 for non-chord diatonic chromas and 3.76for other non-chord tones. The interaction was not
significant.
For 5th-related tones, the two repeated-measures fac-
tors were Chord and 5th Relation, the latter set to 1 for
5th-related tones and 0 for other tones. There were signif-
icant main effects of Chord, F(8, 312)¼5.66, p< .001, Z2¼
.13, and 5th Relation, F(1, 39)¼12.76, p<. 0 1 ,Z2¼.25);
5th-related tones (mean ¼4.07) were rated higher than
other non-chord tones (mean ¼3.75); however, there was
no interaction between Chord and 5th Relation.
For completion tones, the factors were Chord and
Completion (completion tones versus other non-chord
tones). There were main effects of Chord, F(8, 312)¼6.45,
p<. 0 0 1 , Z2¼.14, and Completion, F(1, 39) ¼8.16,
p<. 0 1 ,Z2¼.17; completion tones (mean ¼4.03) were
rated higher than the other non-chord tones (mean ¼
3.85). However, there was no interaction between Chord
and Completion.
In summary, Experiment 1 provided tentative evi-
dence in favor of all four listed theories, but the effect
size was higher for MFs ( Z2¼.33) than for the other
models (.11, .25, and .17 respectively), suggesting MFs
were responsible for most of the variance.
Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was a repeat of Experiment 1 with just one
change in the empirical method. The question that par-
ticipants answered in each trial was: ‘‘Is the tone in the
chord?’’ ( Ist der Ton im Akkord? ); and the rating scale
was labeled 1 ¼definitely not and 7 ¼definitely . The
new question focused the attention of participants on
the chords themselves, rather than on the contexts in
which the chords occur in music. The question also
corresponded more directly to the idea of MFs,
which—if they exist psychologically—should be per-
ceived as physically real tones. We therefore expected
a higher rate of ‘‘errors’’ (participants mistakenly indi-
cating that a tone is in a chord) when a chord is followed
by an MF than when it is followed by another non-
chord tone. All other aspects of Experiment 2 were
identical to Experiment 1, including initial hypotheses.
Because Experiments 1 and 2 are similar, we use a lower
pvalue for significance (.025) for the results section of
Experiment 2 than if the two experiments were consid-
ered independent (where pwould be .05) Detailed
results are shown in Figure 4.
ADDITIONAL HYPOTHESES
When comparing the results of Experiments 1 and 2,
the following additional hypotheses were tested.418 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 14

H7: Mean ratings for Experiments 1 and 2 over 108
trials correlate with each other because the task is so
similar. Confirmed: r¼.79, p< .001. There was no
interaction between Trial Number (a combination of
Chord and Chroma) and Experiment, nor was there an
interaction between Experiment and Chord or Chroma.
H8: The overall mean result for Experiment 2 is lower
than for Experiment 1 because listeners are more likely
to think a chromatic tone goes with a 3-tone chord than
is part of it. Confirmed: a 3-way ANOVA with factors
Chroma (12 levels), Chord (9), and Experiment (2)
revealed a main effect of Experiment, F(1, 39)¼10.88,
p< .01, Z2¼.22. The overall mean rating for Experi-
ment 1 was 4.18; for Experiment 2, 3.98.
H9: The MF predictor is more successful than the
other predictors in Experiment 2, because the question
posed to participants in that experiment focused their
attention on the chords themselves rather than the
contexts in which they appeared (either for all partici-
pants or only for fundamental listeners). To test H9, we
first considered MFs, running an ANOVA with two
factors, Chord (9 levels) and MF-Strength (2). There
were two main effects: Chord, in which some chords
attracted higher mean ratings than others, F(8, 312) ¼
3.27, p< .01,Z2¼.08, and MF-Strength, in which MFs
(mean ¼3.89) were rated higher than other non-chord
tones (mean ¼3.56), F(1, 39) ¼13.26, p<. 0 1 ,Z2¼.25).10The interaction was not significant. We
then ran an ANOVA with factors Chord (9) and Diato-
nicity (2 levels: diatonic chromas versus other non-
chord tones) and Greenhouse-Geisser correction. Only
the main effect of Chord was significant, F(5.3, 259.7) ¼
3.54, p< .01,Z2¼.08. An ANOVA with Chord (9) and
Completion (2 levels, completion tones versus other
non-chord tones) with Greenhouse-Geisser correction
revealed that only the main effect of Chord was signif-
icant, F(1, 39)¼19.37, p< .001, Z2¼.33. Finally, an
ANOVA with Chord (9) and 5th Relation (2 levels:
5th-related chromas versus other non-chord tones) and
Greenhouse-Geisser correction produced main effects
of chord, F(6.1, 238.9) ¼3.95, p< .01, Z2¼.09) and
5th-relatedness, F(1, 39)¼7.70, p< .01, Z2¼.17, and
a significant interaction, F(6.0, 235.3) ¼2.89, p< .05,Z2¼
.07. Both significance level and effect size were higher
for MFs, F(1, 39)¼13.26, p< .01,Z2¼.25, than for 5th-
related tones, F(1, 39)¼7.70, p< .05,Z2¼.17, consistent
with H9.
Summarizing the comparison of Experiments 1 and 2:
In Experiment 1, participants were asked to rate how
FIGURE 4. Results of Experiment 2. The symbols and letters have the same meaning as in Figure 3.
10Because Experiments 1 and 2 are similar, the pvalue for significance
is lower for the results section of Experiment 2. It lies between .05 (if the
two experiments are regarded as independent) and .025 (if they are
regarded as identical).Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 419

## Page 15

well the probe tone went with the preceding chord. That
instruction logically included all four predictors: MFs,
diatonic tones, 5th-related tones, and completion tones,
as reflected in the results. In Experiment 2, participants
were asked if the probe tone was in the chord, which
logically included only MFs—perceived as if they are
physically present. In both experiments, MFs and 5th-
related tones were rated higher than other non-chord
tones, but diatonic and completion tones were only
rated higher in Experiment 1, consistent with the dif-
ferent instruction.
A Comparison of Four Theories
Figure 5 presents an alternative comparison of the pre-
dictions of four theories for Experiments 1 and 2. For
each chord, we considered the two most likely MFs,
diatonic tones, 5th-related tones, and completion tones
according to the models, among the nine non-chord
tones in each case, and considered the mean ratings
given those two non-chord tones by all participants. For
each theory, we predicted that mean ratings for those
two chromas would exceed mean ratings for all nine
non-chord tones. If the mean ratings for chromas pre-
dicted by a given theory A were higher than those pre-
dicted by theory B, we would then have more
confidence in theory A. The comparison is problematic,
because the predictors overlap: one and the same tone
could be predicted by more than one theory.
The results as shown in the figure suggest that in Exper-
iment 1 all models except diatonicity performed betterthan baseline.11In Experiment 2, the MF theory appeared
to account for the data best, followed by completion tones.
This is evidence that MFs in musical chords have psycho-
logical reality—at least when those chords are constructed
from OCTs. The importance of completion tones in the
data reflects the importance of chord extensions in music
theory—the idea that 7th chords are constructed by add-
ing 7ths to triads, and consequently that Western tonal
music is based on triads (Childs, 1998).
The surprisingly poor performance of the diatonicity
model in Experiment 2 can be explained as follows.
Trials in which a chord was followed by a diatonic tone
were more familiar because such combinations happen
more often in music. That made it easier for musically
trained participants to recognize that the tone was not
part of the chord, increasing the number of negative
responses. If, for example, a listener hears the chord
015 followed by the diatonic tone 3 (a normal and
familiar succession in tonal music), the familiar diatonic
relationship helps her or him realize that the tone is not
part of the chord.
Results for Fundamental Versus
Spectral Listeners
The results presented above are averaged over relatively
spectral and relatively fundamental listeners as
FIGURE 5. Comparison of four theories. Mean listener ratings for the first two pitches predicted by each model from among the 9 non-chord tones,
over all chords. The higher the mean rating, the more accurate the prediction of the corresponding model. Baseline is the mean of all 9 non-chord tones
for all chords. Error bars are 95% confidence intervals.
11The models overlap, so the data do not satisfy the independence
condition for ANOVA. To avoid overstating the finding, we apply the
approximate rule that two means are different if confidence intervals do
not overlap, or overlap only slightly (Goldstein & Healy, 1995).420 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 16

determined by AAT. We averaged over the two groups
because previous analyses had revealed no main effect
of listener type; however, group differences were found
in several other analyses.
We predicted a larger difference between ratings of
different listener types in Experiment 2, because the
question posed in that experiment (‘‘Is the tone in the
chord’’) focused the listener’s attention on tones in
the chord itself, whereas the question asked in Experi-
ment 1 (‘‘Does the tone go with the chord’’) referred to
musical context. Results contradicted this prediction.
For Experiment 1, a 3-way ANOVA with factors Chord
(9 levels), Chroma (12), and Listener Type (2) with
Greenhouse-Geisser correction showed significant main
effects of Chord, F(8, 304) ¼5.29,p< .001, Z2¼.12, and
Chroma, F(7.5, 283.8) ¼19.41 ,p< .001, Z2¼.34, but not
Listener Type. However, there were significant interac-
tions between Chroma and Listener Type, F(11)¼2.8,
p< .01,Z2¼.07, and between Chord and Chroma, F(88,
3344)¼4.22,p< .001, Z2¼.10. When the same ANOVA
was performed for Experiment 2, there were significant
main effects of Chord, F(5.4, 205.9) ¼2.4,p< .05, Z2¼
.06, and Chroma, F(6.3, 239.6) ¼16.02 ,p< .001, Z2¼.30,
but not of Listener Type; there was also a significant
interaction between Chord and Chroma, F(88, 334) ¼
5.14,p< .001, Z2¼.12, but this time no interaction
with Listener Type.
When results for individual chords were analyzed
separately, there was sometimes an interaction between
Chroma (12 levels) and Listener Type (2). In Experi-
ment 1, we found this interaction for four of nine
chords: 035, 037, 047, and 048. For Experiment 2, we
found this interaction for three of nine chords: 025, 047,
and 048. However, we could not attach a particular
meaning to the chords for which this difference was
found and those for which it was not found.
We also conducted an ANOVA in which independent
variables were tone type (with two levels: chord tone
versus non-chord tone) and listener type. The interac-
tion for Experiment 1 was significant, F(1)¼5.43,p<
.05,Z2¼.13; relatively fundamental listeners rated
chord tones higher than relatively spectral listeners, by
comparison to non-chord tones. This contradicted our
hypothesis, according to which relatively fundamental
listeners would more likely hear certain non-chord
tones (MFs), thereby reducing the difference between
chord tones and non-chord tones.
When the same ANOVA was performed for Experi-
ment 2, there were significant main effects of Chord,
F(5.4, 205.9) ¼2.4,p< .05, Z2¼.06, and Chroma, F(6.3,
239.6)¼16.02 ,p< .001, Z2¼.30, but not of Listener
Type; there was also a significant interaction betweenChord and Chroma, F(88, 334) ¼5.14,p< .001, Z2¼.12,
but this time no interaction with Listener Type.
Relatively fundamental listeners were predicted to hear
MFs more clearly or more often. To test this idea, we
performed an ANOVA that was restricted to non-chord
tones (9 per chord x 9 chords), for each experiment
separately. Independent variables were chord and tone
type (repeated measures) and listener type (between).
Here, tone type had two levels: MFs and other tones.
We expected an interaction between listener type and
tone type, but found one neither for Experiment 1 nor
for Experiment 2. We also conducted similar analyses in
which the two levels of tone type were defined differ-
ently: completion tones versus other non-chord tones,
diatonic tones versus other non-chord tones, and 5th-
related tones versus other non-chord tones. Again, no
two-way interactions between listener type and tone type
were found.
In sum, we found no clear, consistent, or theoretically
explicable differences between the results of relatively
spectral and relatively fundamental listeners. A possible
explanation is that fundamental listeners were perceiv-
ing musical chords primarily on the basis of musical
experience, rather than hearing MFs directly as we had
hypothesized. This hypothesis is consistent with the
strong dependency of spectral versus fundamental lis-
tening on stimulus exposure reported by Seither-
Preisler et al., (2008). Evidently neither fundamental
nor spectral listeners are capable of focusing attention
on MFs in musical chords.
The finding that MFs accounted for non-chord tone
profiles in both experiments, but especially in Experi-
ment 2, combined with the observed lack of any
consistent significant difference between the results of
spectral and fundamental listeners, can now be explained
differently. A psychohistoric explanation involves two
stages. In the first, MFs influenced how often corre-
sponding tones appeared immediately before and after
given chords in music from previous centuries. In the
second stage, those statistical regularities influenced the
perception of all listeners—both fundamental and spec-
tral. The first stage involved intuitive (subconscious)
perception, in connection with composition and impro-
visation. These processes are always to some extent cre-
ative and experimental (even if contemporary theorists
did not use terminology of that kind), otherwise musical
styles would not have changed historically. The second
stage involved codified compositional conventions that
were presented repeatedly to listeners, causing them to
be enculturated by these statistical regularities. A single-
stage process is also possible, in which some modern
listeners perceive MFs directly.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 421

## Page 17

Experiment 3
The main aim of Experiment 3 was to test the psycho-
logical reality of chord roots by testing whether listeners
spontaneously perceived the roots of diverse musical
chords. A secondary aim was to test the models from
the previous experiments on contrasting data, and to
explore the effect of task on empirically determined
chroma-salience profiles.
Music theorists first started to conceptualize chord
roots and chordal invertibility (inversions relative to
roots) in the early 17th century (Parncutt, 2011a; Rivera,
1984). This new development in the history of ideas was
a response to two centuries of compositional practice in
which most three- and four-voice chords had corre-
sponded to what were later called major and minor triads
in root position (Parncutt et al., 2018). To understand
this historic process, we must consider both culture-
specific ideas and perceptual universals (Eberlein, 1994).
The method for this experiment was inspired by Ter-
hardt’s (1972) standard procedure for determining the
pitch of any short sound (described in Terhardt, 1998,
pp. 312–313; see also Terhardt & Grubert, 1987). In that
procedure, a test sound and a pure reference tone are
heard in alternation. A listener adjusts the frequency of
the pure tone until the two sounds have the same pitch.
The SPL of the pure tone is held constant (e.g., 40 or 60
dB SPL). The procedure produces valid, reliable, quan-
titative pitch estimates. For Experiment 3, we reduced
the number of response possibilities by defining 12
response categories in advance. Rather than allowing
participants to continuously adjust the frequency of the
reference tone, we asked them to choose a pitch from
a set of possibilities.
METHOD
Participants saw an interface with 12 buttons in a circu-
lar arrangement (the chroma circle, illustrated in Fig-
ure 6). At the start of each trial, they clicked on a central
button and heard a chord. They then focused their
attention on the first pitch that they heard in the chord
and found it on a circular display of 12 tones. The chord
could be heard one or two times in each trial (mean:
1.8), and the tones could be heard as often as needed. In
each trial, the chord was randomly transposed around
the chroma circle, but the frequencies of the tones in the
circular interface remained constant: C was always at
the 12 o’clock position, E /flatat 3 o’clock, F/sharpat 6 o’clock.
Nine chords were presented six times each, making 54
trials in all. The order of trials was random and different
for each participant. The chords were physically identi-
cal to those used in Experiments 1 and 2.RESULTS
The results of Experiment 3 for all 40 participants are
presented in Figure 7. From visual inspection, the chord
profiles are much more peaked than for Experiments 1
and 2. In most cases, participants clearly differentiated
between chord tones and non-chord tones. Unlike in
Experiments 1 and 2, they also differentiated among
chord tones. As before, the differentiation was more
difficult for chords such as 036 and 048, presumably
because they were more dissonant or less familiar.
Among chord tones, the most commonly matched
chroma corresponded to the music-theoretical root in
all cases where it could clearly be defined as the higher
tone of a P4 interval. This definition yielded clear pre-
dictions for 7 of the 9 chords, the exceptions being 036
and 048. Considering each chord in Figure 7 in turn, the
Wilcoxon Test (without adjusting for multiple compar-
isons) yielded the following results. The pvalue for
significance is .05/3 ¼.017, because in each chord we
made 3 comparisons (all 3 intervals between all 3 tones).
• For chord 015, tone 5 was rated higher than tone
0(p¼.003)
• For 025, 5 > 0 ( p¼.004), 5 > 2 ( p< .001)
• For 027 (suspended 4th chord), 0 > 7 ( p< .001),
0>2( p< .001), and 7 > 2 ( p< .001)
• For 035, 5 > 0 ( p< .001) and 5 > 3 ( p< .001)
• For 036, 0 > 3 ( p¼.005)
• For 037 (minor), 0 > 7 ( p< .001), 0 > 3 ( p< .001),
a n d7>3( p¼.008)
FIGURE 6. Screenshot for Experiment 3. Participants clicked on the 12
unlabeled chroma buttons to hear the individual tones. Akkord ¼chord,
Weiter ¼next trial, Beenden ¼stop.422 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 18

• For 045, 5 > 0 ( p< .001), and 4 > 0 ( p¼.002)
• For 047, 0 > 7 ( p< .001) and 0 > 4 ( p< .001)
The only chord for which findings contradicted pre-
dictions was the diminished triad (036). The root of the
diminished triad CE /flatG/flatis often considered to be A /flat;t h e
triad may function as an incomplete dominant 7th on A /flat
in the key of D /flat. Parncutt (1988) similarly predicted that
036 has a strong MF at 8. The results of Experiments 1
and 2 were consistent with this prediction, but Experi-
ment 3 contradicted it—perhaps because participants
could play the target chord twice, focusing their atten-
tion on physically present tones (analytic listening). The
result corresponded instead to the music-theoretic prin-
ciple of stacked 3rds (tertian harmony; Rameau, 1721),
which dominates theoretical treatises on both classical
and jazz harmony (e.g., Rawlins & Bahha, 2005). A pos-
sible psychoacoustic explanation: the diminished triad
may be perceived as a mistuned major or minor triad.
That is feasible given that the partials of a HCT can be
mistuned relative to a harmonic series by as much as
a semitone and still be perceived as part of the pattern
(Moore et al., 1985). If tone 0 in the diminished triad 036
is lowered by semitone, the chord becomes 047, the
major triad; and if tone 6 is raised by a semitone, thechord becomes 037, the minor triad. The relatively low
mean rating for the chord’s 3rd (the tone 3 in 036) can
be explained by masking.
Qualitative Data
After each experiment, participants were asked to com-
ment briefly on any aspect of their experience, including
how they felt about the task ( Wie ist es dir bei dieser
Aufgabe gegangen? ) and what strategies they used. We
conducted 120 short interviews (3 experiments x 40
participants). Their comments suggested that most par-
ticipants did not recognize the chord that they heard in
each trial. Those who did, did not identify the interval
between a reference chroma in the chord (such as the
root) and the probe tone.
Of the 40 participants, 32 were asked which chords
they recognized (the first 8 were not asked this ques-
tion). Most replied that they heard major, minor, dimin-
ished, and augmented chords (which were indeed 4 of
the 9 chords), and nine replied that they heard dimin-
ished and augmented more often than major and minor
(in fact, each of these chords was presented equally
often). Ten participants reported hearing 7th chords,050100150
0123456789 1 0 1 13-4A (015)
050100150
0123456789 1 0 1 13-4B (045)Number of times selected
Pitch class of probe tone relative to chord0123456789 1 0 1 13-9 (027)
0123456789 1 0 1 13-11A (037) 0123456789 1 0 1 13-7 (025)
0123456789 1 0 1 13-10 (036)  
050100150
0123456789 1 0 1 13-7B (035) 
0123456789 1 0 1 13-11B (047)
0123456789 1 0 1 13-12 (048)
FIGURE 7. Results of Experiment 3, in which listeners actively selected the best-matching tone from 12 possibilities.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 423

## Page 19

although there were none in the experiment; one par-
ticipant reported hearing only 7th chords throughout
the entire experiment. These responses are consistent
with the psychological reality of MFs at non-notated
chromas.
Those 32 participants were also asked to list the kinds
of chord that they had heard and estimate the percent-
age of each chord in the experiments. Of these, most
immediately objected they could only guess the answer,
but only one refused to try. Major triads were men-
tioned by 27 participants, minor triads by 25, dimin-
ished triads by 17, augmented triads by 17, dominant
7th chords (which never occurred) by 14, suspended 4th
triads by 2, and half-diminished 7th chords (which
never occurred) by 2. Percentage estimates were gener-
ally inaccurate. One participant reported hearing 5 %
major, 5 %minor, 45 %diminished, and 45 %aug-
mented, while another reported 60 %major and 40 %
minor chords. These findings are consistent with our
assumption that most or all participants were unable to
recognize chord-tone relationships and were therefore
unable to respond on the basis of music-theoretic
knowledge.
Although we did not ask how difficult the experi-
ments were, out of all 40 participants, Experiment 1 was
spontaneously described as difficult by 11, Experiment 2
(‘‘Is the tone in the chord?’’) by 26, and Experiment 3 by
13. Five found it difficult to concentrate, and another
five found the experiments tiring or exhausting. Of the
20 participants who heard the shorter 100-ms test
sounds, 12 complained they were too short. Regarding
timbre, 10 participants said that the sounds reminded
them of the organ, 6 of the piano, and 5 participants
complained the timbre was unpleasant.
We also conducted short interviews following AAT.
Six participants reported hearing tones go up and down
simultaneously and chose the movement that sounded
more important.
Correlation Analyses
To further test the psychological reality of MFs at non-
chord tones, we correlated various results and predictors
with each other. We first created a matrix of 8 vectors of
108 values each (12 values for each chord times 9
chords). Note that all 12 chromas are included in this
analysis—both the three chord tones and the nine non-
chord tones. Each vector represents either experimental
data or theoretical predictions according to different
models.
The first three vectors were ratings from Experiments
1, 2, and 3, averaged over all 40 participants. The nextfive vectors were predictions of five models. The first
model was a simple stimulus model corresponding to
music notation, in which the presence of a tone is indi-
cated by 1 and the absence of a tone by 0; chord 015 was
represented by the vector 110001000000. The second
model was the octave-generalized model of harmonic
pitch-pattern recognition by Parncutt (1988), as shown
in Table 6a. The third model was similar to the second
but also considered masking between nearby partials
(Parncutt, 1993), see Table 6b. The last two predictors
are explained below.
Table 7 presents correlation coefficients, calculated by
comparing two vectors of 108 numbers (9 chords x 12
chromas; two-tailed significance tests). Within these
vectors, subvectors for each chord (groups of 12 values)
had been converted to z-scores (with mean ¼0a n d
standard deviation ¼1) before correlation. We first
considered Pearson’s (linear) correlations (Table 7a),
since we were primarily concerned with how well each
chroma is implied by or goes with the chord (conceived
of as a real number) rather than the rank order of the
chromas. We were also concerned to optimize the mod-
els by improving the Pearson correlations. Spearman
(rank) correlations are also shown, because the data are
not normally distributed. Each correlation coefficient
has specific advantages and disadvantages (Hauke &
Kossowski, 2011).
All correlations in Table 7 would have been highly
significant ( p< .01) if considered alone. However, our
primary interest was to compare coefficients with each
other and draw general, tentative conclusions from
those comparisons.
Consider first the Pearson c orrelations. Results of
Experiment 1 correlated well with results of Experiment
2, but less well with Experiment 3, in which participants
actively chose the best-fitting tone and the profiles well
predicted conventional chord roots. The experimental
results also correlated well with the first three models
(stimulus model, Pa (88), Pa (93)). For Experiment 1,
the pitch models correlated better than the stimulus
model as expected—but not for Experiments 2 and 3,
suggesting that the pitch models could be improved by
combining them with the stimulus model.
We therefore created a linear combination of each
pitch model and the stimulus model (Pa (88)’, Pa
(93)’). Relative to Table 6, a constant value of 20 was
added to the predicted weight of the three chromas
corresponding to chord tones. In chord 047, for exam-
ple, the models output profiles of 12 values; 20 was
added to the predicted salience of chromas 0, 4, and
7. By trial and error, we found that the value 20 roughly
maximized the Pearson correlations between model424 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 20

predictions and empirical data for the three experi-
ments. This result can be explained if some participants
intuitively recognized some of the chords, deducing
which pitches were chord tones based on musical expe-
rience or music theory. The success of this combined
model suggests that the salience of chord tones was
underestimated in the original models, relative to other
chromas.
The Spearman correlations in Table 7b confirm that
all correlations are significant at the p< .01 level, but
they do not reflect the superior performance of the
adjusted models Pa (88)’ and Pa (93)’. The better per-
formance of the stimulus model by comparison to other
models confirms that participants were generally able to
distinguish chord tones from non-chord tones.
General Discussion
Experiment 1 shed light on the perceptual and cognitive
foundations of chord-scale compatibility in music the-
ory. A comparison of results with predictions of differ-
ent models suggests that the scales with which a chord is
compatible depend on both ‘‘nature’’ and ‘‘nurture’’ (aspreviously defined). The tones of compatible scales can
be MFs, diatonic tones, 5th-related tones, or completion
tones, or a combination of these.
Experiment 2 demonstrated that although MFs are
not consciously perceived at non-chord tones in musical
chords, listeners’ perceptions are influenced by them.
Historically, they could be an important factor influenc-
ing variations in salience of non-chord tones. If so,
a systematic consideration of such MFs belongs to the
foundations of Western music theory.
Results of Experiment 3 were consistent with pre-
dicted chord roots according to virtual pitch theory.
Whereas some participants may have responded on the
basis of music-theoretic knowledge, our qualitative data
suggest that individual chords were seldom correctly
recognized, reducing the chance that results were arti-
facts of music-theoretic knowledge. Results were con-
sistent with both Terhardt’s (1974, 1982) claim that
chord roots are virtual pitches and Thomson’s contrast-
ing (1993) claim that they are cultural phenomena.
Taken together, the results of Experiments 1, 2, and 3
suggest that the models of Parncutt (1988, 1993) cor-
rectly identify the main MFs in musical chords, butTABLE 7. Correlation Coefficients, Calculated by Comparing Two Vectors of 108 Numbers (9 chords x 12 chromatic pitches).
A) Pearson
Data Model
Expt 1 Expt 2 Expt 3 Stimulus Pa (88) Pa (93) Pa (88)’ Pa (93)’
Data Expt 1 1 .85 .77 .81 .83 .84 .85 .86
Expt 2 .85 1 .79 .85 .82 .81 .87 .86
Expt 3 .77 .79 1 .82 .79 .79 .84 .83
Model Stimulus .81 .85 .82 1 .86 .84 .96 .93
Pa (88) .83 .82 .79 .86 1 .99 .97 .98
Pa (93) .84 .81 .79 .84 .99 1 .95 .98
Pa (88)’ .85 .87 .84 .96 .97 .95 1 .99
Pa (93)’ .86 .86 .83 .93 .98 .98 .99 1
Note: Pa (88)’ is a linear combination of Pa (88) and the stimulus model; Pa (93)’ similarly. All correlations are p< .01 (two-tailed comparisons).
B) Spearman
Data Model
Expt 1 Expt 2 Expt 3 Stimulus Pa (88) Pa (93) Pa (88)’ Pa (93)’
Data Expt 1 1 .73 .62 .72 .69 .69 .69 .69
Expt 2 .73 1 .57 .74 .65 .65 .65 .66
Expt 3 .62 .57 1 .74 .54 .53 .55 .54
Model Stimulus .72 .74 .74 1 .74 .73 .75 .75
Pa (88) .69 .65 .54 .74 1 .98 1.00 .99
Pa (93) .69 .65 .53 .73 .98 1 .98 1.00
Pa (88)’ .69 .65 .55 .75 1.00 .98 1 .99
Pa (93)’ .69 .66 .54 .75 .99 1.0 .99 1
Note: Pa (88)’ is a linear combination of Pa (88) and the stimulus model; Pa (93)’ similarly. All correlations are p< .01 (two-tailed comparisons).Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 425

## Page 21

overestimate their perceptual salience. One possible
explanation is that the MFs of chords in music result
from incomplete, approximate harmonic series of
slightly asynchronous partials; the models ignore the
mistuning and asynchrony. A second explanation is that
musicians learn to ignore MFs during musical training
and practice, including ear-training courses.
For methodological reasons, the chords in our experi-
ments were built from OCTs and not from HCTs. These
chords, like those presen ted by Krumhansl (1990),
sounded similar to chords played on a church organ,
suggesting that our participants perceived them as if
they comprised HCTs. If so, we can imagine a two-
stage cognitive process: first, chord recognition based
on similarity, and second, access to perceptual (non-
linguistic) ‘‘knowledge’’ about the chord as it occurs in
music, such as profiles of prevalence of preceding and
following tones.
Comparing the results of the pretest (AAT) and the
main experiments, the data suggest that our participants
sometimes directly perceived tone sensations at MFs
and at other times responded according to statistical
distributions in music to which they had been exposed.
Results of Experiment 2, in which participants were
asked if the probe tone was ‘‘in the chord,’’ were better
accounted for by a theory of MFs than results of Exper-
iment 1, in which participants were asked if the tone
‘‘went with the chord.’’ Results of Experiment 2 also
suggest that variations in the salience of non-chord
tones were better accounted for by a psychoacoustic
theory of MF perception than by three competing the-
ories based on experience of tonal music: diatonicity,
5th relations, and completion tones (tones that com-
plete a familiar, more complex chord). The lack of a con-
sistent significant difference between relatively
fundamental and relatively spectral listeners in Experi-
ment 2 suggests in addition that participants were not
directly perceiving tones at non-chord-chromas;
instead, they may have been imagining pitches that
often occur before and after those chords in music—
because in the past MFs were sometimes perceived in
those chords at those pitches.
On this basis, we propose a speculative psychohistoric
explanation for the observed variations in perceptual
salience of non-chord tones. A psychohistoric account
considers both the acoustics of musical sounds and his-
toric changes in their perception. By contrast, psycho-
acoustic theories of pitch perception focus on physical
properties of the real-time stimulus such as periodicity
or harmonicity. A psychoacoustic approach usually does
not consider the situation in which a sound is perceived
or the (musical) experience of the listener.A psychohistoric approach would ideally acknowl-
edge the role and relevance of the history of musical
structure, the history of music perception, the history
of music theoretic ideas, and the historical, social, and
ideological context dependency of music perception
(Cazden, 1945). The points in this list are causally inter-
connected (confounded) and hence resistant to empir-
ical scientific investigation. A psychohistoric approach
also acknowledges and addresses the ‘‘two cultures’’
problem of Snow (1959) by introducing humanities
issues into scientific discourse and vice versa. It has the
potential to reconcile persistent contradictions between
scientific approaches such as Krumhansl (1990) and
Terhardt (1974), while at the same time acknowledging
the positive contribution of both, and on that basis pro-
vide a new foundation for a comprehensive psycholog-
ically founded theory of major-minor tonality.
If we tried to understand historic music perception
from a purely psychoacoustic viewpoint, we might pre-
dict that, since the advent of counterpoint, European
listeners have been influenced by weak MFs at non-
chord tones—that is, pitches that are not octave-
equivalent to chord tones (e.g., the tone A in the chord
CEG). In temporal theories of pitch perception, these
tone sensations or tonal implications correspond to
approximately periodic patterns in the waveform after
auditory filtering. In spectral approaches, they corre-
spond to fundamental frequencies of incomplete,
approximately harmonic patterns of audible partials.
In a psychohistoric paradigm, this subconscious, his-
torically undocumented aspect of musical pitch percep-
tion influenced the statistical probability of certain
tones preceding and follo wing certain chords. For
example, the probability that the tone A would precede
or follow the chord CEG, regardless of context, was
boosted because A was weakly implied as an MF. Statis-
tical regularities of that kind were then internalized by
Western listeners (cf. Tillmann et al., 2000).
Our findings are limited to relationships between
chromas and do not consider octave register. Future
work may return to this issue, following Parncutt
(1989) and Terhardt et al. (1982). Consider for example
the A-minor triad ACE, in close position with A in the
bass (e.g., A3C4E4). The tone A usually has audible
harmonics at chromas A, E, C/sharp, G, and B; C, at C, G,
E, B /flat, and D; and E, at E, B, G/sharp, D, and F/sharp. The triad’s
spectrum has (approximate) fundamental frequencies at
6 or more chromas: physically present at A, C, and E,
and missing (MFs) at D, F, and B. Ignoring voicing and
register, the MF at D is associated with partials at D, A,
F/sharp, C, and E; the MF at F, with C, A, and G; and the MF
at B, with B, F/sharp,A ,a n dC/sharp.I fr e g i s t e ri st a k e ni n t o426 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 22

account, specific pitches are predicted to be more salient
than others, depending on the chord’s voicing. The the-
ory could be tested by manipulating the amplitude of
selected harmonics of selected MFs, testing whether the
salience of those MFs changed according to predictions.
We have not considered non-human pitch perception
or neural substrates of pitch perception. That non-
human animals perceive MFs (e.g., Heffner & Whitfield,
1976) is unsurprising given the ecological and social
significance of fundamental frequency in conspecific
vocalizations (e.g., Biben, Symmes, & Bernhards,
1989) and the susceptibilit y of the fundamental to
masking in noisy environments (Sinnott, Stebbins, &
Moody, 1975). Prior to the present study, we know of
no evidence for the perception of MFs at non-chord
tones within musical chords in either human or non-
human subjects. It is difficult enough to demonstrate
MF perception within musical chords with musically
trained listeners; nonmusicians were excluded from our
experiments because the task was too difficult. Nor are
there published empirical studies on neural mechan-
isms underlying individual pitches perceived within
musical chords or implied by musical chords. Studies
such as Maess, Koelsch, Gunter, and Friederici (2001)
and Patel, Gibson, Ratner, Besson, and Holcomb (1998)
considered music-syntactic relationships and incongru-
ities, but not individual pitches. Although each chord in
o u re x p e r i m e n t sw a sp r e s e n t e di ni s o l a t i o n ,p o s t -
experiment interviews suggested that chords were per-
ceived as musical entities, implying that their perception
was affected by musical experience—an aspect that non-
humans are unlikely to be sensitive to and mechanistic
temporal models of pitch perception are unlikely to
account for.
Our findings may inspire new approaches to analysis
and composition. 20th-century music theorists repeat-
edly addressed issues of pitch salience: Schoenberg and
followers such as Webern or Boulez tried to abandon
syntactic relations and hierarchical distinctions between
musical tones, making them compositionally less
important. Discussion about the artistic virtues and per-
ceptibility of such procedures is ongoing; no matter how
hard a composer tries to avoid hierarchical cognitive
structures, the listener will still construct them in an
attempt to make sense of the music (Dibben, 1994,
1999; Imberty, 1993). From a psychological viewpoint,
it is practically impossible to achieve atonality, since in
passages regarded as ‘‘atonal’’ some tones or chromas
generally sound more important than others. Even if we
tried to equalize tone saliences for the average listener,
applying algorithmic models to real-time measurement
and adjustment, there would still be individualdifferences due to Adorno’s listener typologies and the
increasing diversity of modern musical styles and musi-
cal audiences (Lilienfeld, 1987). Issues of this kind can
be clarified by combining psychological and music-
theoretical approaches.
Our findings have additional applications in music
analysis and composition. Pitch salience could be
notated in musical scores as notehead size (Parncutt,
2011b); non-notated pitches might be gray instead of
black. In algorithmic composition, Ferguson and Parn-
cutt (2004) applied the pitch algorithm of Parncutt
(1989) to composition in a relatively complex and dis-
sonant style; future work may generate more consonant,
accessible music, and revisit the question of ‘‘new tonal-
ities.’’ In computer-based expressive performance,
musical expression (including timing and dynamics)
depends on harmonic accent, which in turn involves
both vertical dissonance and horizontal harmonic rela-
tionships (Bisesi & Parncutt, 2011); a better understand-
ing of MFs in chords could improve algorithms to
predict harmonic accent, leading to more convincing
artificial performances.
Music-psychological studies of pitch perception and
cognition tacitly assume a one-to-one correspondence
between notated and perceived pitches. Our findings
undermine this assumption. Aspects of Krumhansl’s
(1990) cognitive structures may be explicable by varia-
tions in pitch salience and MFs. These include the tone
profiles of musical keys (to nal hierarchies; Parncutt,
1989, 2011a) and tone profiles of chord progressions
(Huron & Parncutt, 1993; Parncutt & Bregman, 2000).
Melodies in major and minor keys may be perceived as
prolongations of tonic triads (Parncutt, 2014; cf. Forte &
Gilbert, 1982; Schenker, 1906/1954). In a psychohistoric
approach, ratings of chords (harmonic functions) rela-
tive to tonal contexts depend on the prevalence of sim-
ilar chord progressions in music, which in turn depend
on pitch commonality and preferences for root progres-
sions such as falling 5ths (Parncutt, 1989, 2005).
Conclusion
We measured tone profiles for a relatively large number
of musically representative, isolated musical chords,
using contrasting empirical methods and a large num-
ber of participants. Our results may represent the best
existing body of data for the testing of explanatory
psychoacoustic, cognitive, and music-theoretic models.
We then demonstrated that models of MFs, diatonicity,
5th relations, and completion tones can account in part
for tone profiles of typical musical chords (Experiment
1), but that MFs and 5th relations dominate when theTone Profiles of Musical Chords 427

## Page 23

listener’s attention is more focused on tones in the
chord itself (Experiment 2). We also presented what
is presumably the most conclusive evidence to date for
the psychological reality of chord roots (Experiment 3).
In three different approaches to analysis of data from
Experiments 1 and 2 (ANOVA, comparison of mean
ratings at predicted chromas, and correlation analysis),
we presented convergent evidence that peaks in the
tone profiles of musical chords are significantly influ-
enced by MFs.
An analysis of individual differences (fundamental
versus spectral listeners) suggested, however, that indi-
vidual listeners do not perceive these MFs directly.
A possible explanation involves the well-documented
sensitivity of listeners to statistical distributions in the
music to which they are exposed. We speculate that MFs
may have been perceived by past listeners, which influ-
enced statistical pitch distributions of past music, which
in turn influenced the music to which our participantswere exposed, and hence their real-time music percep-
tion. This ‘‘psychohistoric’’ approach addresses a long-
standing issue about the status of virtual pitches in tonal
music and suggests that the contrasting approaches of
Krumhansl and Terhardt may be complementary rather
than contradictory.
Author Note
We thank Erica Bisesi, Andreas Fuchs, Fabio Kaiser,
Daniel Reisinger, and Craig Sapp for computing support
and assistance with music database analyses.
Parts of this paper were presented at the Ninth Trien-
nial Conference of the European Society for the Cogni-
tive Sciences of Music, Manchester, August 17-22, 2015.
Correspondence concerning this article should be
addressed to Richard Parncutt, Centre for Systematic
Musicology, University of Graz, Merangasse 70, 8010
Graz, Austria, E-mail: parncutt@uni-graz.at
References
BARBOUR , J. M. (1951). Tuning and temperament: A historical
survey . East Lansing, MI: Michigan State College Press.
BHARUCHA ,J .J .( 1 9 8 4 ) .A n c h o r i n ge f f e c t si nm u s i c :T h e
resolution of dissonance. Cognitive Psychology, 16 (4),
485–518.
BHARUCHA , J. J. (1987). Music cognition and perceptual facili-
tation: A connectionist framework. Music Perception, 5, 1–30.
BIBEN,M . ,S YMMES ,D . ,&B ERNHARDS , D. (1989). Contour
variables in vocal communication between squirrel monkey
mothers and infants. Developmental Psychobiology, 22 (6),
617–631.
BILES, J. A. (2003). GenJam in perspective: A tentative taxonomy
for GA music and art systems. Leonardo, 36 (1), 43–45.
BISESI,E . ,&P ARNCUTT , R. (2011). An accent-based approach to
automatic rendering of piano performance: Preliminary audi-
tory evaluation. Archives of Acoustics 36 (2), 1–14.
BLA¨TTLER , D. J. (2017). A voicing-based model for additive
harmony. Music Theory Online, 23 (3).
BOWLING ,D .L . ,&P URVES , D. (2015). A biological rationale for
musical consonance. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 112 (36), 11155–11160.
BOWLING ,D .L . ,P URVES ,D . ,&G ILL, K. Z. (2017). Vocal sim-
ilarity predicts the relative attraction of musical chords.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Retrieved
from www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1713206115
BURNS ,E .M . ,&W ARD, W. D. (1978). Categorical perception—
phenomenon or epiphenomenon: Evidence from experiments
in the perception of melodic musical intervals. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 63 , 456–468.CAZDEN , N. (1945). Musical consonance/dissonance: A cultural
criterion. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 4, 3–11.
CHILDS , A. P. (1998). Moving beyond neo-Riemannian triads:
Exploring a transformational model for seventh chords.
Journal of Music Theory, 42 , 181–193.
CUDDY ,L .L . ,&B ADERTSCHER , B. (1987). Recovery of the tonal
hierarchy: Some comparisons across age and levels of musical
experience. Perception and Psychophysics, 41 , 609–620.
DAHLHAUS , C. (1990). Studies on the origin of harmonic tonality
(R. Gjerdingen, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press. (Original work published 1968)
DEUTSCH ,D . ,&F EROE , J. (1981). The internal representation of
pitch sequences in tonal music. Psychological Review, 88 (6),
503–522.
DIBBEN , N. (1994). The cognitive reality of hierarchic structure in
tonal and atonal music. Music Perception, 12 , 1–25.
DIBBEN , N. (1999). The perception of structural stability in
atonal music: The influence of salience, stability, horizontal
motion, pitch commonality, and dissonance. Music Perception,
16, 265–294.
EBERLEIN , R. (1994). Die Entstehung der tonalen Klangsyntax
[The origin of tonal-harmonic syntax]. Frankfurt/Main: Peter
Lang.
FERGUSON ,S . ,&P ARNCUTT ,R .( 2 0 0 4 ) .C o m p o s i n g‘ I nt h e
flesh’: Perceptually-informed harmonic syntax. Proceedings
of Sound and Music Computing Conference . Paris, France:
SMCC.
FORTE , A. (1973). The structure of atonal music. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press.428 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

## Page 24

FORTE ,A . ,&G ILBERT , S. E. (1982). An introduction to
Schenkerian analysis. New York: Norton.
GAULDIN , R. (1983). The cycle-7 complex: Relations of diatonic
set theory to the evolution of ancient tonal systems. Music
Theory Spectrum, 5, 39–55.
GOLDSTEIN ,H . ,&H EALY, M. J. (1995). The graphical presen-
tation of a collection of means. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society Series A, 158, 175–177.
HAUKE ,J . ,&K OSSOWSKI , T. (2011). Comparison of values of
Pearson’s and Spearman’s correlation coefficients on the same
sets of data. Quaestiones Geographicae, 30 (2), 87–93.
HEFFNER ,H . ,&W HITFIELD , I. C. (1976). Perception of the
missing fundamental by cats. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 59 , 915–919.
HOLLERAN ,S . ,J ONES ,M .R . ,&B UTLER , D. (1995). Perceiving
implied harmony: The influence of melodic and harmonic
context. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21 (3), 737–753
HURON , D. (2001). Tone and voice: A derivation of the rules of
voice-leading from perceptual principles. Music Perception, 19 ,
1–64.
HURON ,D . ,&P ARNCUTT , R. (1993). An improved model of
tonality perception incorporating pitch salience and echoic
memory. Psychomusicology, 12, 152–169.
IMBERTY , M. (1993). How do we perceive atonal music?
Suggestions for a theoretical approach. Contemporary Music
Review, 9 (1-2), 325–337.
KRUMHANSL , C. L. (1990). Cognitive foundations of musical pitch.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
KRUMHANSL , C. L. (1991). Music psychology: Tonal structures in
perception and memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 42 (1),
277–303.
LERDAHL , F. (1988). Tonal pitch space. Music Perception, 5,
315–349.
LILIENFELD , R. (1987). Music and society in the 20th Century:
Georg Lukacs, Ernst Bloch, and Theodor Adorno.
International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society, 1 (2),
120–146.
LOWINSKY , E. E. (1954). Music in the culture of the Renaissance.
Journal of the History of Ideas, 15 (4), 509–553.
LYNCH ,M .P . ,E ILERS ,R .E . ,O LLER,D .K . ,&U RBANO ,R .C .
(1990). Innateness, experience, and music perception.
Psychological Science, 1 (4), 272–276.
MAESS,B . ,K OELSCH ,S . ,G UNTER ,T .C . ,&F RIEDERICI ,A .D .
(2001). Musical syntax is processed in Broca’s area: An MEG
study. Nature Neuroscience, 4 (5), 540–545.
MILNE,A .J . ,L ANEY ,R . ,&S HARP , D. B. (2015). A spectral pitch
class model of the probe tone data and scalic tonality. Music
Perception, 32 (4), 364–393.
MOORE , B. C. J. (2003). Introduction to psychology of hearing
(5th ed.). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Academic.MOORE ,B .C .J . ,P ETERS , R.W ., & G LASBERG , B. C. (1985).
Thresholds for the detection of inharmonicity in complex
tones. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 77,
1861–1867.
NISBETT ,R .E . ,P ENG,K . ,C HOI,I . ,&N ORENZAYAN , A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic cog-
nition. Psychological Review, 108 (2), 291–310.
NORTON , R. (1984). Tonality in Western culture: A critical and
historical perspective. University Park, PA: Penn State
University Press.
PARNCUTT , R. (1988). Revision of Terhardt’s psychoacoustic
model of chord root(s). Music Perception, 6, 65–94.
PARNCUTT , R. (1989). Harmony: A psychoacoustical approach.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
PARNCUTT , R. (1993). Pitch properties of chords of octave-spaced
tones. Contemporary Music Review, 9, 35–50.
PARNCUTT , R. (2005). Perception of musical patterns: Ambiguity,
emotion, culture. In W . Auhagen, W . Ruf, U. Smilansky, & H.
Weidenmu ¨ller (Eds.), Music and science - The impact of music
(Nova Acta Leopoldina, Bd. 92, Nr. 341, pp. 33–47). Halle,
Germany: Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina.
PARNCUTT , R. (2009). Tonal implications of harmonic and
melodic Tn-types. In T. Klouche & T. Noll (Eds.), Mathematics
and computing in music (pp. 124–139). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
PARNCUTT , R. (2011a). The tonic as triad: Key profiles as pitch
salience profiles of tonic triads. Music Perception, 28, 333–365.
PARNCUTT , R. (2011b). The transdisciplinary foundation of
(European) music theory [Keynote address]. Rome, Italy:
EuroMAC.
PARNCUTT , R. (2014). The emotional connotations of major
versus minor tonality: One or more origins? Musicae Scientiae,
18,324–353
PARNCUTT ,R . ,&B REGMAN , A. S. (2000). Tone profiles following
short chord progressions: Top-down or bottom-up? Music
Perception, 18 , 25–57.
PARNCUTT ,R . ,&H AIR, G. (2011). Consonance and dissonance
in theory and psychology: Disentangling dissonant dichoto-
mies. Journal of Interdisciplinary Music Studies, 5 (2), 119–166.
PARNCUTT ,R . ,&H AIR, G. (2018). A psychocultural theory of
musical interval: Bye bye Pythagoras. Music Perception, 35 ,
475–501.
PARNCUTT ,R . ,R EISINGER ,D . ,F UCHS ,A . ,&K AISER , F. (2018).
Consonance and prevalence of sonorities in western polyph-
ony: Roughness, harmonicity, familiarity, evenness, diatonicity.
Journal of New Music Research, 48 (1), 1–20.
PATEL,A .D . ,G IBSON ,E . ,R ATNER ,J . ,B ESSON ,M . ,&H OLCOMB ,
P. J. (1998). Processing syntactic relations in language and
music: An event-related potential study. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 10 (6), 717–733.
PEARCE ,M .T . ,&W IGGINS , G. A. (2012). Auditory expectation:
The information dynamics of music perception and cognition.
Topics in Cognitive Science 4(4), 625–652.Tone Profiles of Musical Chords 429

## Page 25

PEASE,T . ,&P ULLIG , K. (2001). Modern jazz voicings: Arranging
for small and medium ensembles . Milwaukee, WI: Hal Leonard
Corporation.
PREISLER , A. (1993). The influence of spectral composition of
complex tones and of musical experience on the percepti-
bility of virtual pitch. Perception and Psychophysics, 54 ,
589–603.
RAHN, J. (1980). Basic atonal theory . New York: Longman.
RAMEAU , J.-P. (1721). Traite ´de l’harmonie reduite a des principes
naturels . Paris, France: Ballard. www.chmtl.indiana.edu
RAWLINS ,R . ,&B AHHA , N. E. (2005). Jazzology: The encyclopedia
of jazz theory for all musicians. Milwaukee, WI: Hal Leonard
Corporation.
REICHWEGER , G. (2010). The perception of pitch salience in
musical chords of different tone types (Master’s thesis,
Diplomarbeit). University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
RITSMA , R. J. (1967). Frequencies dominant in the perception of
the pitch of complex sounds. Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 42, 191–198.
RIVERA , B. V. (1984). The seventeenth-century theory of triadic
generation and invertibilitiy and its application in contempo-
raneous rules of composition. Music Theory Spectrum, 6,
63–78.
SCHENKER , H. (1954). Harmony (E. M. Borgese, Trans.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Original work published 1906)
SCHNEIDER ,P . ,S LUMING ,V . ,R OBERTS ,N . ,S CHERG ,M . ,G OEBEL ,
R., S PECHT ,H .J . , ET AL . (2005). Structural and functional
asymmetry of lateral Heschl’s gyrus reflects pitch perception
preference. Nature Neuroscience, 8 (9), 1241–1247.
SEITHER -PREISLER ,A . ,J OHNSON ,L . ,S EITHER ,S . ,L U¨TKENHO ¨NER,
B. (2008). The perception of dual aspect tone sequences
changes with stimulus exposure. Brain Research Journal, 2 (3),
125–148.
SEITHER -PREISLER ,A . ,K RUMBHOLZ ,K . ,P ATTERSON ,R . ,
JOHNSON ,L . ,N OBBE ,A . ,S EITHER ,S . ,&L U¨TKENHO ¨NER,B .
(2007). Tone sequences with conflicting fundamental pitch and
timbre changes are heard differently by nusicians and non-
musicians. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 33, 743–751.SHEPARD , R. N. (1982). Geometrical approximations to the
structure of musical pitch. Psychological Review, 89 , 305–33.
SINNOTT ,J .M . ,S TEBBINS ,W .C . ,&M OODY , D. B. (1975).
Regulation of voice amplitude by the monkey. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 58 , 412–414.
SNOW, C. P. (1959). Two cultures. Science, 130 (3373), 419–419.
TERHARDT , E. (1972). Zur Tonho ¨henwahrnehmung von Kla ¨ngen
[Perception of pitch in complex sounds]. Acustica, 26,
173–199.
TERHARDT , E. (1974). Pitch, consonance, and harmony. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 55, 1061–1069.
TERHARDT , E. (1982). Die psychoakustichen Grundlagen der
musikalischen Akkordgrundto ¨ne und deren algorithmische
Bestimmung [Psychoacoustic foundations of musical chord-
roots and their algorithmic determination]. In Dahlhaus, C.
(Ed.), Tiefenstruktur der Musik (pp. 23–50). Berlin: TU Berlin.
TERHARDT , E. (1998). Akustische Kommunikation [Acoustic
communication]. Berlin: Springer.
TERHARDT ,E . ,&G RUBERT , A. (1987). Factors affecting pitch
judgments as a function of spectral composition. Perception
and Psychophysics, 42 , 511–514.
TERHARDT ,E . ,S TOLL ,G . ,&S EEW ANN , M. (1982). Pitch of
complex signals according to virtual-pitch theory: Tests,
examples, and predictions. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America, 71, 671–678.
THOMPSON ,W .F . ,&C UDDY , L. L. (1989). Sensitivity to key
change in choral sequences: A comparison of single voices and
four-voice harmony. Music Perception, 7, 151–68.
THOMPSON ,W .F . ,&P ARNCUTT , R. (1997). Perceptual judgments
of triads and dyads: Assessment of a psychoacoustic model.
Music Perception, 14 , 263–280.
THOMSON , W. (1993). The harmonic root: A fragile marriage of
concept and percept. Music Perception, 10 , 385–415.
TILLMANN ,B . ,B HARUCHA ,J .J . ,&B IGAND , E. (2000). Implicit
learning of tonality: A self-organizing approach. Psychological
Review, 107 , 885–913.
TRAINOR ,L .J . ,&T REHUB , S. E. (1994). Key membership and
implied harmony in Western tonal music: Developmental
perspectives. Perception and Psychophysics, 56 , 125–132430 Richard Parncutt, Sabrina Sattmann, Andreas Gaich, & Annemarie Seither-Preisler

