# 

**Author:**   
**Subject:**   
**Total Pages:** 35  
**Source File:** `Introduction_to_the_Pitch_Organization_o.pdf`

---

## Page 1

Introduction to the Pitch Organization of French Spectral Music
Author(s): François Rose
Source: Perspectives of New Music, Vol. 34, No. 2 (Summer, 1996), pp. 6-39
Published by: Perspectives of New Music
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/833469
Accessed: 24/10/2010 16:30
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp . JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=pnm .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Perspectives of New Music  is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Perspectives
of New Music.
http://www.jstor.org

## Page 2

INTRODUCTION 
TO THE PITCH ORGANIZATION 
OF FRENCH SPECTRAL MUSIC 
FRANCOIS ROSE 
INTRODUCTION 
G tRARD GRISEY (b.1946) and Tristan Murail (b. 1947) are the two 
best-known French "spectral" composers. Their music promotes a 
very specific aesthetic which gives predominance to timbre, a trend 
already foreseen in the stance of some institutions such as IRCAM 
(Institut de Recherche Coordination Acoustique et Musique) and GRM 
(Groupe de Recherche Musicale) and also in the works of composers 
like Olivier Messiaen, Gyorgy Ligeti, Iannis Xenakis, and Karlheinz 
Stockhausen (who included consideration of timbre projected into 
rhythm and form in his famous article "... wie die Zeit vergeht .. ."). 
But although many composers have placed a strong emphasis on timbre, 

## Page 3

French Spectral Music 
the composers of the spectral school have made it the main element in 
their compositions. They have also established the overtone series as their 
point of reference. 
The overtone series is a theoretical concept which describes a set of 
vibrations whose frequencies are all integral multiples of one fundamental 
frequency (fi). Any frequency can be used as a fundamental while the 
other elements of its overtone series are called respectively: the second 
partial (f2) which is equal to 2 x f, the third partial (f3) which is equal 
to 3 x f, and so on. 
Example 1 shows an overtone series. The low E1 (41.2 Hz) is the fun- 
damental and it is shown with its first thirty-two partials. The microtones 
generated by this process are indicated with arrows and are rounded to 
the nearest quarter or sixth of a tone. 
Partial: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
1/6 1/4 1/4 1/6 
-vI 
Partial: 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 
1/6 1/4 1/6 1/6 1/4 1/6 1/6 1/4 
_l_I -- - 4 T - 
EXAMPLE 1: THE FIRST THIRTY-TWO PARTIALS OF AN OVERTONE SERIES 
BASED ON A LOW E 
But the originality of spectral music does not come from the fact that it 
uses the overtone series. By 1850 the German physicist Hermann Helm- 
holtz had discovered how the "color" of sound was influenced by the 
content and weighting of its overtone structure. Spectral music is singu- 
lar and interesting because its practices respond to complex physical cir- 
cumstances like the overtone series, rather than upon local and ad hoc 
stratagems such as are involved in building musical structures on the basis 
of a cell or a motif, as has been the dominant tradition in Western music. 7 

## Page 4

Perspectives of New Music 
This idea of rejecting the motif as the principal constituent element of 
a composition and of establishing timbre instead was posited by Grisey 
during a presentation at the Darmstadt courses in 1978: 
The material derives from the natural growth of sonority, from the 
macrostructure and not the other way round. In other words there 
is no basic material (no melodic cell, no complex of notes or note- 
values).1 
Spectral music is original, I believe, not only in its choice of models but 
also because of its attitude towards time. Indeed, a music based on a 
complex acoustic structure may be understood to require a more dilated 
time span. Although timbre and time are strongly linked in spectral 
music, time will not be discussed in this paper. (The reader interested in 
the temporal aspect of spectral music should read Grisey's article "Tem- 
pus ex Machina: A Composer's Reflection on Musical Time." See Bibli- 
ography.) 
HARMONICITY/INHARMONICITY 
The origin of spectral music is closely linked to the development of new 
technologies and more specifically to the computer, whose refinements 
made possible the analysis of sounds, the resolution of partials and their 
relative amplitudes. The basic conception of timbre used by the spectral 
composers is also strongly influenced by certain electronic music tech- 
niques, particularly additive synthesis. This method involves the summa- 
tion of component frequencies (produced by sine tones) in order to build 
up complex composites. 
For the beginning of Partiels (1975), Grisey was stimulated by a sono- 
gram analysis of a pedal low E1 (41.2 Hz) on the trombone. He selected 
some component frequencies and orchestrated them. That is why this 
technique can be metaphorically referred to as "instrumental additive 
synthesis." Example 2 shows Grisey's selection of component frequencies 
and his assignment of them to instruments. His orchestration respects, 
on a larger scale, not only the frequencies themselves, but the time-point 
proportionality between the entrance of the model trombone sono- 
gram's partials. It also takes into consideration the dynamic level of each 
component. For example, his sonogram's analysis revealed that the 
dynamic level of the trombone's fourth partial is low, so he orchestrated 
it with a natural harmonic played on the string bass, a much weaker 
sound than the others in the sonority. 8 

## Page 5

French Spectral Music 9 
All the frequency components illustrated in Example 2 are integral 
multiples of the frequency of low E: therefore this spectrum is called 
"harmonic." If any component is not a whole-number multiple of the 
fundamental, the phenomenon is called "inharmonicity." There can be 
varying degrees of inharmonicity. The development of the first section of 
Partiels is based on this notion. 
Partial 
43 
38 
34 Violins ^ 
30 j 1/4 # 
26 
22 Piccolo 
18 Viola 1/ 
14 Viola 
10 Cello 
6 Clarinet 
4 Cb(?) ) : 
2 Trombone 
1 Cb - 
EXAMPLE 2: THE FIRST HARMONIC STRUCTURE OF PARTIELS 
During the course of eleven repetitions of this sonority, some inhar- 
monic components are gradually introduced to unsettle the initial 
timbre. The progressive introduction of foreign components is illustrated 
by Example 3, where the inharmonic tones are indicated as black notes, 
in contrast to the white notes which indicate harmonic components. The 
three upper staves of Example 3 show the voicings of the woodwinds, the 
percussion, and the strings/accordion, respectively. Inharmonicity is 
achieved in stages through a downward octave shifting. For instance, 
Example 3 shows that the first inharmonic tone occurs in the third state- 
ment when the fifty-seventh partial of the low E (D7 = 2348.6 Hz) is 
presented one octave too low (D6 = 1174.3 Hz), by the percussion. In 
the sixth repetition, the fifty-first partial of the low E follows the same 
pattern (C7 = 2101.5 Hz, shifted down to C6 = 1050.8 Hz), while the 

## Page 6

10 Perspectives of New Music 
octave-lowered fifty-seventh partial is lowered an additional octave, to D5 
(587.2 Hz). The same process is carried on until the eleventh statement 
where only two harmonic components remain, the E3 and B3 (the fourth 
and sixth partials, respectively, of the low E1). 
1 2 3 4 5 
8 -..-- ..-- .---- . ..--------- ..--- 6 7 8 
__ i' I- 9 10 
iL t 11 
Woodwinds pa ; * , ^ &.e rW 
Pemunion " f #.0 l" ##e i 8^-- ^^.r^<s r 
p , 
Strings ad I 
Accordion 
14d 
10th 
6th 
2nd 
Ist 
noise tl * . ,vS jf I-s Av at W .&$4= t" ! *,, 
V 1 a6 V Via Via Via Fl Cla Cello Fl E.Hn Vli Fl 
J i C a CL ia. ri Hn Cla EHn Via Fl aF 
Cello Cello Cello 
Cello _Cla C Ob Hn vL Trb Cla Hn F r.n . 
Cello Cello Cello Via Vin 
.Ha -_H. Hn . Hn .CB tB CIB. Trb .Th. Hnh Hntrrh 
Trb Trb Trb Trb Trb Trb Hn CIB Cello CIB 
Cb Ce Cb Cb Cb Cb Cb Cb Cb Cb Cb 
8 
Via Via Hn _Th Fl FIlln Vln/VIa FmlCn 
Via Via E.Hn CIB 
EXAMPLE 3: PROGRESSION FROM HARMONICITY 
TO INHARMONICITY IN PARTIELS 
From the perspective of orchestration, there are some interesting 
points. As indicated by the three lower staves on Example 3, partials 1, 2, 
6, 10, and 14 are present in each of the eleven reiterations, creating a 
formant-like emphasis on these partials through the entire section. At the 
same time, the instrumental coloration of these five constant partials is 
gradually modified. 
Moreover, as the timbre becomes increasingly inharmonic, noise 
elements are added to the orchestration. The instruments which intro- 
duce the noise are indicated at the bottom of Example 3. The string EFr- "s r D - * r ,r- 1r B 

## Page 7

French Spectral Music 
instruments add noise by putting more pressure on the bow while the 
wind instruments achieve a similar effect by changing dynamics very 
rapidly while sustaining their sounds. 
I have mentioned that this technique could be metaphorically referred 
to as instrumental additive synthesis because the analogy between the 
model and its realization remains theoretical. The significant difference 
between the model and the realization is that each component is played 
by a musical instrument rather than being a sine tone. In other words, 
the simple and anonymous oscillation of sine tones is replaced by com- 
plex sounds, each with a distinct identity. Consequently, the underlying 
concept of adding simple sounds together to create a complex one is 
modified, to the combination of several complex sounds creating an even 
more complex one. Thus it should be clear that the idea is not to create 
an acoustical reproduction of an electronic sound, but rather to adapt an 
electronic procedure for acoustical instruments. Naturally, the result of 
this procedure, while deriving from physical models, no longer shares but 
replaces the characteristics of the modeled phenomenon. 
MICROPHONY/MACROPHONY 
In his piece Transitoires (1980-81), Grisey used sonographic analyses of 
a string bass, played in five different ways: pizzicato, normal, normal 
toward the bridge, almost on the bridge, and finally sul ponticello. The 
results of these analyses are illustrated in Example 4, and are labeled V, W, 
X, Y, and Z, respectively. Partials 1, 2, 3, 11, 13, and 15 are present in all 
five sounds, creating a formant-like emphasis for the entire section. 
Once again Grisey incorporated the time proportionality between the 
entrance of the various components and also the relation between their 
various intensities into his orchestration. He conceived both the entire 
orchestra and a smaller group of instruments as two synthesized string 
basses, which we might call a macrophonic and a microphonic one. He 
further contrasted these two synthesized string basses with a real one, 
always presenting the three in the following order: real, microphonic, 
macrophonic. 
Furthermore, the succession of the three sounds imitates the ampli- 
tude contour of a real string bass sound; in this case, the real string bass 
mimics the attack, the microphonic one acts as the rise to the steady-state 
which is imitated by the macrophonic bass, as is the decay portion of the 
sound. I I 

## Page 8

Perspectives of New Music 
Partial Pizz. Ord. - - Sul 
number ponticello 
V W X Y Z 
66th / 
55th 
53rd 
52nd / 
51st/ / 
50th , 
44th 
37th 
34th 
33rd / 
32nd 
31st / 
30th / / / 
29th/ / / / 
28th / / 
27th / / / / 
26th 
25th / / 
24th / 
23rd ,/ / 
22nd / / 
21st / 
20th / / 12 

## Page 9

French Spectral Music 
Partial Pizz. Ord. Sul 
number ponticello 
V W X Y Z 
19th / ,/ / 
18th I/ / 
17th / / / / 
16th 4/ / 
15th / / / / / 
14th / / I / 
13th / / / 4/ 
12th / / /4 
11th / / / / 
10th / / / 
9th / / / / 
7th / 
6th / 
5th / / / 
3rd 4/ / / 
2nd I/ / / 
1st / / / / / 
EXAMPLE 4: PARTIAL CONTENT OF THE DOUBLE BASS, 
ANALYZED FOR TRANSITOIRES 
Example 5 shows the durational transformations of the three sounds; 
the real bass sound, its microphony, and its macrophony. The succession 
"real sound-microphony-macrophony" is repeated twelve times. The 
duration of the real bass sound gets longer and the activity within this 
duration gets faster. From a quarter-note periodicity the motion becomes 13 

## Page 10

Perspectives of New Music 
aperiodic and then gradually returns to periodicity at a speed of 3/7 of a 
quarter note. The duration of the microphony decreases in a sawtooth 
motion; it moves from 11'/5 beats to 12 beats, then down to 61/6 beats 
then up to 123/7 then down to 3 beats and so on until it disappears com- 
pletely. The process of the macrophony tends toward harmonic and 
rhythmic periodicity. At repetition 7, the chord Zis repeated three times 
successively at a duration of 15/7 beats. At repetition 9, it is repeated four 
times successively at a duration of 13/7 beats. At repetition 10 and 12, the 
two chords W and Z are repeated in succession and each time the dura- 
tion of the W chord within a repetition cycle remains constant while the 
duration of the Z chord gets gradually longer. For example, in repetition 
10, the duration of the Wchord remains constant at a quarter note plus a 
dotted-eighth-note septuplet while the duration of the Z chord moves 
from a half-note, to a half-note plus an eighth-note quintuplet, and then 
to a half-note plus a quarter-note quintuplet. 
Real Sound Microphony Marophony 
o J J J 1 beats 
o i ~6 ~ 12 ? J J J? 12 JJJ 
o ~1! Jn z 
o .. J ,J J.jiJ.J_ J_. o) ? 5 j 5n? J J_J^ 5 
V W Z Z Z Z Z V I Y 
e .n_.mn ,J J: 4 ,,_ }J ,~J a},~J ,,Ji l} o? J i n.~ J 23 J ...J. J.... J :J_ L.o.. v y 
x V z w v V 
6 6 7 7 m m _ , 
V ,W Z ,W z, , , W ,W V 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7.3.. ... . ? ^n, iinf jjjjjj.ijjjjjj 
? W7 .JZ-.M. 7.J?.J? . v0 Z J- j^JJX Z-J'JJ 'J v 
EXAMPLE 5: TEMPORAL TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE REAL, 
MICROPHONIC, AND MACROPHONIC BASS SOUNDS IN TRANSITOIRES 14 

## Page 11

French Spectral Music 
The microphony is composed of sustained pitches which, through the 
twelve repetitions of the process, move in five steps from harmonicity 
toward inharmonicity as shown on Example 6 (where the inharmonic 
tones are indicated by black notes). The degree of inharmonicity is grad- 
ually increased over the five structures by the successive replacement of 
the harmonic components by inharmonic ones further and further away 
from normative positions. For example, the seventeenth partial (F5) is 
displaced downward by one octave in the second structure, while the 
twenty-ninth partial (Dt6) is displaced downward by two octaves in the 
third one. Finally, the fourth and fifth structures add successively the 
fifty-seventh (D7) and the ninth partials (F#4), displaced downward by 
four and two octaves, respectively. 
t) Wr - 'r r- 4* 4 r 
9: Is #*" #*' # 
9y i O ? ? ! 
~~Y- a's av a's 8' 
Step no.: 1 - 2 3-4 5-6-7-8 9 10-11 
EXAMPLE 6: HARMONIC PROGRESSION OF THE MICROPHONY 
SUBHARMONICITY 
The overtone series is characterized by large intervals at the bottom 
which gradually become smaller and smaller in the higher register. By 
inverting the order of the intervals-that is, by beginning with the large 
intervals in the higher register-one obtains an artificial construct called 
a subharmonic spectrum, with a very chromatic low register. This tech- 
nique is used by Grisey in Modulations (1976-77). 15 

## Page 12

Perspectives of New Music 
Example 7 illustrates this process. Each measure shows, on the left, a 
harmonic spectrum, and to its right a corresponding subharmonic spec- 
trum. If we look at the progression of the ten harmonic spectra, we will 
see that: 
1. The fundamentals, shown as diamond-shaped notes, move chro- 
matically from E down to G. 
2. The relationship between the fundamentals of the harmonic and 
the subharmonic spectra rises gradually throughout this section. 
Over the ten steps, the fundamental of the subharmonic spectrum 
moves from a relationship of a fourth to the twentieth partial in 
relation to the fundamental of the harmonic spectrum. These rela- 
tionships are shown by the straight lines in Example 7. 
3. The harmonic spectra move gradually toward inharmonicity. The 
inharmonic components, shown as black notes, are indicated with 
decimals in Example 7 where "partials" 11.5, 10.5, 9.5, and 5.5 
represent the twenty-third, twenty-first, nineteenth, and eleventh 
partials, respectively, one octave lower, and 8.8, 7.8, 6.8, and 4.3 
represent the thirty-fifth, thirty-first, twenty-seventh, and seven- 
teenth partials, respectively, two octaves lower. The tenth spectrum 
is decidedly inharmonic with six inharmonic components. 
4. The spectra get gradually more and more compressed. Though all 
have a substantial number of components, in the first harmonic 
spectrum they lie between its second and seventeenth partial while 
in the tenth one they are between its second and the tenth partial. 
5. There is a gradual design to bring the harmonic and subharmonic 
spectra closer together. For example, while the first harmonic spec- 
trum covers the high register the subharmonic one covers the low 
register. The only pitch they have in common is the E4, but in the 
tenth and last chord, the second and tenth components of the 
harmonic spectrum are equal to the tenth and second components, 
respectively, of the subspectrum. 
FILTERING TECHNIQUE 
The composers of spectral music have been influenced by several elec- 
tronic processes besides additive synthesis: filtering, ring modulation, and 
frequency modulation among others. The conceptual behavior of each 
process is metaphorically transposed from the electronic domain to the 
acoustical one. 16 

## Page 13

French Spectral Music 
0 C 2 ^ Qp - Ch 
r - 0-0 
00 
r ) W r-u) 021 ON - tr S 
N_~ ?_ !7_ O O 0> 0s n 
N oe '- oo op 
O Q 00 r' N 17 
z 
0 
z 
0 P4 
I )p 
4 - 
cn 
W _, 
$ I 
Wr?to 
__C a - 
W m 
=1$ 
0 

## Page 14

18 Perspectives of New Music 
0 
o x -oq oc 
o S\ t0 Q B Bo 
e oo o-^ ?-Q - . 
^00 ir- ~~ 0 0 1 O 
o n o z F X z \ * < M , e o 
A00 00???CO < 
s-.00-00" ^ -0, In 
s--| oo? v 

## Page 15

French Spectral Music 
Spectral analyses have shown that mutes behave as filters. They inhibit 
some spectral areas while enhancing some others. Having analyzed the 
spectral influence of different mutes on a low E2 on the trombone, Grisey 
used his results to produce an impressive timbral transformation in 
Modulations (1976-77). As shown in Example 8, the ensemble is divided 
into four groups labeled A, B, C, and D, with an overall harmonic 
progression from harmonicity toward inharmonicity. The harmonic con- 
tent of each group is based on his analyses of the different mutes. For 
example, his analyses revealed that partials 2, 5, 8, 9, and 15 of the low E 
were enhanced when this fundamental was played on a trombone muted 
with a Harmon mute. Consequently, Grisey specifically chose the pitches 
corresponding to those partials to define the voicing of Group A. He 
used the same procedure for Group B (stopped horn), Group C (an 
imaginary mute), and Group D (cup mute). 
Harmon 1 
mute ta 15 
? 
? 1- 1/TF 61 # ro 8 1/4 l' ?- 
#oI . #. 
W W' W" 
1/4 R -' 
rJ 2 r r 
Stopped 
horn 
i/4/~ - / 13 - #t 
1/4t 13 1/6 8 raS)1 
X X' X" 
12 3 
F4 2 
Imaginary 1/4 t 
Y y' y" 
S ): ~ ",'-2,1/4 ti , "2 r 
Cup 8 ..' 
mute 'i 
1/6 0 ,7 O 
z Z' Z" 
nt 3 
rJ 2 r ' 
Harmonicity - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Inharmonicity 
EXAMPLE 8: VOICING BASED ON ANALYSES OF THE TROMBONE'S MUTES 19 
_a 

## Page 16

Perspectives of New Music 
The first collection of chords used by each group is illustrated in 
Example 9. As indicated, the specific voicing of each group is transposed 
over the descending lower voice. Because those four groups are pre- 
sented in succession, Grisey thinks of this procedure as a counterpoint of 
different timbres. He refers to this idea as a spectral polyphony. The tech- 
niques of interpolation used to join chord w to w' and then to chord w" 
will be presented later. 
15 Vnl . ------------------- 8 . Vln ---------- - V2 
Vlnllb- '~& Vln3 4lt~, .. Vln_4_.l4_.' Via2 a.- . 
vinfL V 5--M L_ 13- V_ _ - Vlal fS g 
Perc & -e Vln4 v Perc iV13 \I 1 
cla Cia 
I-rpt - Tit : In Trb 
4 'w -~ Tn, ~ W~~~~~WIF1n ~ [.r r 
Group A Group B Group C Group D 
Vln 3 is tuned a quarter tone flat 
Vln 4 is tuned a sixth tone flat 
Vln 5 is tuned a quarter tone flat 
Via 3 is tuned a sixth tone flat 
EXAMPLE 9: FILTERING TECHNIQUES IN MODULATIONS 
COMBINATION TONES 
This technique is the acoustical counterpart to ring modulation. The 
combination tones between any two frequencies A and B are obtained by 
adding and subtracting the two frequencies: A + B gives the summation 
tone while A - B gives the difference tone. This principle can be 
extended to infinity if we consider second-order, third-order, (et cetera) 
combination tones. In the case of second-order combination tones, the 
summation and difference tones are taken between all the pairings 
involving the second-harmonic components, both with each other and 
with the fundamental frequencies (i.e., 2A + 2B; 2A + A, 2A - A, 
2A + B, 2A-B; 2B + B, 2B-B, 2B + A, 2B-A; 2A + 2B and 
2A- 2B). I 20 

## Page 17

French Spectral Music 
Grisey thinks of combination products as "shadow-tones." He has 
used this technique in several pieces, including Partiels and Modulations. 
Example 10 shows the use of this technique in Partiels. 
Four observations can be made about the overall progression: 
1. In Example 10, the three-stave system shows from top to bottom: 
the partials, the generative pitches, and the difference tones. The 
generative pitches are labelled with circled letters, which are used to 
show how the difference tones were calculated and the harmonic 
relationship between the generative pitches and the partials. For 
instance, in the first measure of Example 10, the low C2 (65.41 Hz) 
and the D12 (69.3 Hz) a semitone higher are two generative 
pitches labeled A and B, respectively. The pitch D3 (146.38 Hz) is a 
fourth-order difference tone between the two generative pitches 
since (4 x 69.3) - (2 x 65.41) = 146.38. Consequently, the shadow- 
tone D3 is labeled C and this letter is preceded by the formula 
4B - 2A. On the other hand, G2 (98 Hz) and F#1 (46.24 Hz) are 
harmonically related to C2 and DI2 (enharmonic for C#2), respec- 
tively. The generative pitch C and the shadow-tone G are the sec- 
ond and third partials of a low C1 (32.7 Hz), while the generative 
pitch Dl and the shadow-tone F# are the third and second partials, 
respectively, of a very low F#0 (23.12 Hz). 
2. The generative pitches move in an oscillating motion from the low 
to the high register as indicated in Example 11. The ratio between 
the frequencies of the two generative pitches provides important 
information about the degree of harmonicity of their shadow tones. 
A simple ratio ensures that the shadow tones will be in a harmonic 
relationship with the two generative pitches, while a complex ratio 
gives an inharmonic relationship. 
As shown in Example 11, the main intervals between the two 
generative pitches are tritones and seconds (major or minor, includ- 
ing seventh and ninth). Those intervals produce inharmonic results. 
But in the third measure of the last system of Example 10 or, equiv- 
alently, the third dyad of the fifth (last) group in Example 11, there 
is a decisive change of relationship between the two generative 
pitches: G#5 and E6 correspond to the fortieth and sixty-fourth par- 
tials, respectively, of a low E1 (41.2 Hz), as indicated by the num- 
bers in the square boxes. Consequently, all the combination tones 
produced by those two generative pitches are partials of the low E1. 21 

## Page 18

#1 =88 
3A/2=E 2B/3 4D/3=H 2F/5 1/3 
GP ?8 ? ? o ? O ? 8__ 8J b 8-- 
4A-B 30 c? J-G 
4A-2@B=C > 3C-2D/2=G 2*3G-2H=J r 17:16- 3G-J r 138 : A4A-2B--C r ?' [3G-H 8 J 
8-- 
EXAMPLE 10: COMBINATION TONES IN PARTIELS NJ 
I'O 
'zI n, 
CD 
0 o 
-f () rS 

## Page 19

French Spectral Music 
0 u 
0@ ? 
@ ^ ? 
II i 
_ o ?^ ^ - 
*<? 1i K i O;;?a3 
?t 1\ 23 
0 
-4 
1 
r r 
oql i- z 
0 
u 
0 
w 0 
c o 
N u 
c el 
II 
C14 
44 I 

## Page 20

Perspectives of New Music 
w 
o 
cl 
z 
0 Z/ 
?~ 
00oo 
II 
S00 IV U 
?^ ? 
x ~~~X 
I J^ : * 
" * ;?qlo ^@ 
II? # @ 
iQI o ? 
'w3~~~~~1 
t t 
,, @O J? 
nE~~~ 5 24 
I 
I 
)0 

## Page 21

French Spectral Music 25 
z 
II 
00a~d~j 000)&< ^ 0ql 0o P 
Q~ _/\ a i ^/ \;o U 
S ^ ' * ( 

## Page 22

Perspectives of New Music 
Fo1 
I 
11 z 
C 
0 
WQ 
0-4 
w 26 

## Page 23

French Spectral Music 
For example, in the third measure of the last system the twenty- 
fourth partial of the low E, the B5 (987.8 Hz) is also the first-order 
difference tone between the sixty-fourth and fortieth partials 
(64 -40 = 24). This change of relationship between the two 
generative pitches is anticipated earlier in the second, third, and 
sixth measures of the third system and in the fifth measure of the 
fourth system, with a major third, minor tenth, minor sixth, and a 
major sixth, respectively, all of which produce harmonic results 
(these correspond in Example 11 to the second, third, and sixth 
dyads of the third group and the fifth dyad of the fourth group, 
respectively). 
EXAMPLE 11: PROGRESSION OF THE GENERATIVE PITCHES 
3. The change from inharmonicity to harmonicity is also prepared 
through control of the number of pitches generated in each sec- 
tion. The arrows in Example 10 show that the introduction of new 
pitches is gradually reduced since partials and difference tones are 
increasingly used as generative pitches in subsequent sections. 1! " Zi 
8 Ti 
e-------------------------------- 
1- x TF ---- 
tp a- ^- - ^ d ^ 
^: ~ ~~~~~~~~~~T i 27 

## Page 24

Perspectives of New Music 
While only one shadow tone is used as the next generative pitch in 
the first presentation of the process (first system), eight are so used 
in the fourth repetition (fourth system). At that point the shadow- 
tones and generative pitches are all focusing toward the harmonic 
spectrum of E. 
4. The combination-tone technique is not used solely to generate har- 
monic components. As indicated in the first measure of Example 
10, the difference tone between the two generative pitches C2 
(65.41 Hz) and D62 (69.3 Hz) produces a rhythmic pulsation since 
69.3 Hz - 65.41 Hz = 3.89 Hz. A frequency of 3.89 Hz has a 
period of 1/3.89 = 0.26 second. At this point in the piece, the 
tempo is MM = 88, at which speed a beat lasts 0.682 second. 
Consequently, a period of 0.26 is approximately equal to that of 
eleven pulsations in the time of four beats at MM = 88 
(0.682 + 0.26 = 2.62). But as the generative pitches move from 
the low to the high register, the shadow-tones move from rhythmic 
pulsation to audible pitch. While three pulsations are generated in 
the first presentation of the process (first system) a final one is pro- 
duced in the second presentation (second system). Thus, harmony, 
timbre, and this facet of rhythm are different types of results, all 
generated by the same process. 
Another interesting aspect of this section of the piece is the strong cor- 
relation between the vertical and horizontal organization of the composi- 
tion: the transformation over time of the timbral harmonies and their 
durations, respectively. A time matrix of 42.5 beats (twenty 2/4 measures 
plus one 5/8 measure) is used to control the generative pitches' 
entrances at first. This time matrix is repeated three times, first at 
MM = 88, then at MM = 104, and the third time at MM = 128. 
Consequently, while the number of beats of the time matrix remains 
stable, its total duration is shortened through the manipulation of metro- 
nome markings. 
For the fourth repetition, the time matrix is reduced to half its size 
(twenty-one beats) at MM = 90. And finally for the fifth repetition, it is 
shortened even more, to fifteen beats at MM = 100. As shown in 
Example 11, seven pairs of generative pitches are presented in the first 
four repetitions of the process, and only six in the last one. 
The progression of durations is summarized in Example 12. The dura- 
tion of each of the seven entrances of the set of generative pitches is indi- 
cated in number of beats. In the first step the seven durations are totally 
aperiodic while in the fifth one they oscillate slightly around 2.5 beats (at 
MM = 100 this equals 1.5 seconds). Finally, the section reaches a point 28 

## Page 25

French Spectral Music 
of cadence where the changes occur periodically every 1.5 seconds. (This 
cadential point corresponds to the last measure in Example 10). 
Duration in beats of the seven 
changes 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
MM Number Duration Number 
of in of 
beats seconds changes 
= 88 42.5 29 7 9 4.5 5.5 3 4 6.5 11 
= 104 42.5 24.5 7 7 9.5 3.5 4 5.5 4.5 9.5 
= 128 42.5 20 7 8 5.5 4 5 4.5 6.5 9 
= 90 21 14 7 4.25 1.75 3.25 2.25 2.5 3 2 
= 100 15 9 6 2.5 2.75 2.25 2.5 2.75 2.25 
EXAMPLE 12: TRANSFORMATION OF THE DURATIONS 
In conclusion, vertical and horizontal organization-expressed as har- 
mony and rhythm-follow parallel processes, since the harmonic motion 
(inharmonicity toward harmonicity) is imitated in the temporal domain 
by the motion of aperiodicity toward periodicity. 
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that, due to Grisey's control of 
both the intervals between the generative pitches and the rate of intro- 
duction of new pitches, the harmonic motion from inharmonicity toward 
harmonicity is made very gradual. This gradual motion is also reflected in 
the temporal domain, except that here it is the number of beats between 
the shortest and the longest durations within a single repetition which is 
gradually reduced. In the first step of the process, the longest and short- 
est durations are eleven and three beats, respectively, with a difference of 
eight beats between them. This difference is reduced to 6 beats (9.5 - 
3.5) in the second step, to 5 (9 - 4) in the third one, and to 2.5 
(4.25 - 1.75) in the fourth step, before reaching near-periodicity in the 
fifth step where the difference has been reduced to 0.5 beats (2.75 - 
2.25). 29 

## Page 26

Perspectives of New Music 
FREQUENCY MODULATION 
John Chowning's concept of frequency modulation (FM) is straight- 
forward: a spectrum is created through the modulation between two fre- 
quencies. The carrier frequency, c, is altered by the modulating one, m, 
while the number of partials in the resulting spectrum is determined by 
an index of modulation, i. As indicated by the following basic equation, 
the frequencies present in an FM spectrum are all summation and differ- 
ence tones between the carrier and modulating frequencies: 
Fi = Ic?(m' i)l 
The ratio m/c shows the degree of harmonicity of the resulting timbre. 
Simple ratios such as 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 create harmonic spectra, while com- 
plex ratios produce inharmonic ones. (The reader interested in FM 
should look at Chowning's article, "The Synthesis of Complex Audio 
Spectra by Means of Frequency Modulation." From this it will be appar- 
ent that the equation provided here is a simplification of Chowning's 
equation: for reasons of simplicity the part of the equation related to 
amplitude has been left out). 
Tristan Murail used FM technique as a metaphor in generating the 
harmonic structures in the first section of his piece Gondwana (1980) for 
orchestra. He used G4 (392 Hz) as a carrier and G#3 (207.65 Hz) as the 
modulating frequency, and chose 9 for the index of modulation. Example 
13 shows the summation and difference tones resulting from the preced- 
ing formula. 
Summation tones Difference tones 
Sti = 599.65 Hz (Dt) Dtl = 184.34 Hz (F#) 
St2 = 807.3 Hz (Gt) Dt2 = 23.3093 Hz (F#) 
St3 = 1014.95 Hz (Bt) Dt3 = 230.96 Hz (A#) 
St4 = 1222.6 Hz (D#) Dt4 = 438.61 Hz (A) 
St5 = 1430.26 Hz (FT) Dt5 = 646.27 (E) 
St6 = 1637.91 Hz (A;) Dt6 = 853.92 Hz (G#t) 
St7 = 1845.56 Hz (B ) Dt7 = 1061.57 Hz (C) 
St8 = 2053.21 Hz (C) Dt8 = 1269.22 Hz (EL) 
St9 = 2260.87 Hz (Db) Dt9 = 1476.88 Hz (Gb) 
(t = 1/4tone higher) 
EXAMPLE 13: SUMMATION AND DIFFERENCE TONES 
CALCULATED WITH THE FM FORMULA 30 

## Page 27

French Spectral Music 
Murail rounds most of the tones to the twelve-equal-tempered scale, 
except where pitches fall almost exactly on a quarter tone. These are indi- 
cated in Example 13 with arrows. 
Murail combined the summation and difference tones to build the 
harmonic structure which begins Gondwana. The result is shown in 
Example 14. 
15 A I 
Carrier = 392 Hz 
vA 
I I 
Modulator = 207.65 Hz 
Modulator = 2 8A 
8 A 
I 
15 15- - - - 
summation tones difference tones 
EXAMPLE 14: FREQUENCY MODULATION IN GONDWANA 
Since the ratio m/c equals approximately 17/32, the spectrum is 
rather inharmonic. While Example 15 shows the carriers and modulators 
that Murail used to generate his first, second, fourth, fifth, and eighth 
sound structures, Example 16 shows only the pitches he included in his 
orchestration. The thirteenth structure, used at the beginning of the sec- 
ond section of the piece, is made of the superposition of two harmonic 
spectra, one based on G#2 (103.83 Hz) and the other one on F#o (23.1 
Hz)-the fundamentals themselves, however, are not present. (The com- 
posite technique he used to generate the other chords is the topic of the 
next section.) Example 16 shows the entire progression. a 31 
b11 

## Page 28

Perspectives of New Music 
1st 2nd 4th 5th 8th 13th 
Carrier .r - . 
[ 0) r- p~~ ~ WTi 
IL - 1 IL II L II U1 IL 4 1 Modulator l;' - #- |- 
i9 i=9 i=9 10 i0 -8 i=10 
8-- 
EXAMPLE 15: THE CARRIERS USED BY MURAIL FOR 
GONDWANA, FIRST, SECOND, FOURTH, FIFTH, EIGHTH, 
AND THIRTEENTH SOUND STRUCTURES 
A very important component of Murail's musical language is his 
orchestration technique. A description of the orchestration of Gond- 
wana's first chord will help to illustrate this point. Murail gave the first 
chord a bell-like orchestral envelope with the medium-low frequencies 
played by the brasses including the modulator which is played by the 
tuba. The high frequencies are played by the woodwinds but in an unfa- 
miliar distribution. The first clarinet in El plays an Al6 (two octaves 
above the second-space Al in treble clef) while the two first oboes play 
Ft6 and El6 respectively. The clarinet's pitch, being in a more comfort- 
able register than the two oboes, is spectrally richer, its sound more 
present. This way Murail imitates a common phenomenon found in most 
acoustical sounds including bells, where some frequencies resonate more 
strongly than others. Moreover, the fast fade-out of higher partials which 
characterizes bell sounds is imitated by an instrumental transfer. Basically, 
instruments which have a timbre rich in higher partials, such as trumpets 
and horn, are faded out and replaced by three clarinets, which have a 
timbre less rich in higher partials. Murail also uses the piano, vibraphone, 
two crotales, and two tubular bells to evoke the attack of the bell sound. 
Moreover, the pitch material of these instruments includes several equal- 
tempered approximations of the microtones played by some other instru- 
ments of the orchestra, thereby producing microtonal friction which 
creates beating, an effect reminiscent of the bell. Thereby, the orchestra- 
tion which is integrated in the musical language is as important as all the 
other compositional components. Timbre is brought to the foreground 
of the organizational dimension. 32 

## Page 29

French Spectral Music 
15 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
9: ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ #4= 15 
1 #$ B f^ r ? m 
12 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~~~~~ Tiemt 
7 8 9 1 10 11 12 
EXAMPLE 16: HARMONIC PROGRESSION FOR GONDWANA'S FIRST SECTION 33 
A 

## Page 30

Perspectives of New Music 
TECHNIQUES OF INTERPOLATION 
Grisey and Murail have both used certain procedures to generate inter- 
mediate steps between points defined by the procedures discussed thus 
far. As was mentioned before, Murail uses twelve chords in the opening 
section of Gondwana, the first, second, fourth, fifth and eighth chords 
calculated with the FM formula, while the thirteenth one is created by 
the superposition of two harmonic spectra. Each of the intermediate 
chords is a composite of the two adjacent chords. For example, the third 
chord is made of a combination of some elements of the second and 
fourth chords, as shown in Example 17. 
15 
QJ 
,) 
8 
itt- to ?c 1 ? X 6t I> I 
071 0g # iv* 
7I I "I. I_ I 
|T bP vpw I vllr I - 
2nd chord selection from 3rd chord selection from 
the 2nd chord the 4th chord 
\ + 4th chord 
EXAMPLE 17: TECHNIQUES USED BY MURAIL 
TO GENERATE INTERMEDIATE STEPS IN GONDWANA 
It is also interesting to notice that we find in the first section of Gond- 
wana an example of interpolation of orchestral envelope (by "orchestral 
envelope" I metaphorically refer to the overall shape produced by the 
evolution of the registral scope of an orchestral sound). The first har- 
monic structure described above is given a bell-like envelope, while the 
twelfth one is given a trumpet-like envelope. The gradual transformation 1 
1 
\ 34 

## Page 31

French Spectral Music 
from the first envelope to the twelfth produces ten intermediate orches- 
tral shapes that Murail uses to determine the entrance and cut-off time 
points for the different registers of his orchestral masses. 
Grisey uses a different approach to interpolation in Modulations. I have 
shown in Example 8 that the orchestra is divided into four groups. Each 
group starts with a harmonic spectrum and moves in two steps toward an 
inharmonic spectrum. Example 18 shows how Grisey interpolates the 
intermediate harmonic steps. 
8 ,/A n 
I: 
-J 
W W A 1/6 1/4 
1. 1' "h ? 1/4 V_ 
w -------------------------------------------------------- W ' 
9 
)9 
-*? __ L 
6 b - I I- - - W 
----------------------.--.-.-.--.---........................ T 
The * indicates that the harmony over the bass note is exactly the 
same as the preceding chord, but transposed a semi-tone higher. 
EXAMPLE 18: TECHNIQUE OF HARMONIC INTERPOLATION 
USED BY GRISEY IN MODULATIONS 
At this point, group A is orchestrated with the initial voicing of group 
D (with the exception that the lower fifth is a quarter tone sharper) using 35 

## Page 32

Perspectives of New Music 
G2 (98 Hz) as a fundamental. The fundamental moves up a fifth chro- 
matically while the chord structure is gradually transformed. First, the 
third component of the chord moves from an octave relationship with 
the fundamental to a minor ninth, then the fourth component moves 
from a quarter-tone flat minor seventh to a quarter-tone sharp octave, 
and finally the fifth component moves from a major third to a major sixth 
to produce the w' structure. The altered components are indicated with 
diamond-shaped notes in Example 18. A similar process is repeated until 
the w" structure is reached. 
Example 18 shows only the process for group A, but the same prin- 
ciple applies to the three other groups with the following changes; group 
B is orchestrated with the initial voicing of group C based on Ab2 
(103.83 Hz), group Cis orchestrated with the initial voicing of group B 
based on A2 (110 Hz) and finally group D is orchestrated with the initial 
voicing of group A based on B62 (116.54 Hz). 
CONCLUSION 
The first and most important concept proposed by spectral composers is 
the rejection of the successive interval relationship as the principal con- 
stituent element of a composition and the establishment of timbre 
instead. Moreover, concepts like harmonicity, inharmonicity, and subhar- 
monicity lead to a special definition of harmonic language in this music; 
essentially, harmony and timbre become two different facets of the same 
phenomenon. In combination with the use of interpolation strategies, 
spectral music offers a new sense of harmonic direction based on struc- 
tural parallelisms without the use of a hierarchical system. 
But the contribution of spectral music is not exclusively to be found in 
its rationale for chordal identity and succession. With its transference of 
such phenomena as ring modulation, frequency modulation, combina- 
tion tones, and filtering from the electronic to the acoustical domain, it 
presents new compositional ideas and generates new procedures like 
microphony and macrophony. 
Although spectral music has often been criticized as restricting the 
individual character of melody, polyphony, and rhythm in the name of 
fusion and continuity, it is indisputable that the strength of the concepts 
and ideas derived from spectral music are unique. As a result, it puts 
listeners in the position of having to find new ways of listening to and 
understanding music. Could a polyphony between two voices, lasting 
fifteen seconds, be transformed into a polyphony between two timbres 
lasting five minutes? 36 

## Page 33

French Spectral Music 37 
Spectral practices have succeeded in making one think in new terms. 
They propose to make one feel new kinds of musical time and to bring 
timbre into the composer's palette on the same level as melody, harmony, 
or even form. 
A RECOMMENDATION 
Although this article focuses on the two best known French "spectral" 
composers Gerard Grisey and Tristan Murail, the reader interested in 
investigating this subject further should also look at the music of, among 
others, Hugues Dufourt, Kaija Saariaho, Horatiu Radulescu, and Mesias 
Maiguashca. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I wish to thank Professor Roger Reynolds of UCSD and Jerome Kohl of 
Perspectives of New Music for their invaluable help in the editing of this 
text. 
NOTES 
1. Record notes; Gerard Grisey, Erato STU71157, 1981. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Boulez, Pierre. "Tendances de la musique recente." Revue Musicale no. 
236 ("Vers une musique experimentale") (1957): 28-35. Reprinted in 
Pierre Boulez, Releves d'apprenti, ed. Paule Thevenin, 223-31 (Paris: 
Editions du Seuil, 1966). English edition, "Directions in Recent 
Music," in Notes of an Apprenticeship, trans. Herbert Weinstock, 224- 
32 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1968). New English edition, "Ten- 
dencies in Recent Music," in Stocktakings from an Apprenticeship, 

## Page 34

Perspectives of New Music 
trans. Stephen Walsh, 173-79 (Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1991). 
Bouliane, Denys, and Anne LeBaron. "Darmstadt 1980." Perspectives of 
New Music 19 (1980-1981): 420-41. 
Chowning, John M. "The Synthesis of Complex Audio Spectra by Means 
of Frequency Modulation." Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 
21, no. 7 (September 1973): 526-34. 
Dalbavie, Marc-Andre. "Notes sur Gondwana." Entretemps no. 8 (Sep- 
tember 1989): 139-45. 
Dodge, Charles, and Thomas A. Jerse. Computer Music: Synthesis, Com- 
position, Performance. New York: Schirmer Books; London: Collier 
Macmillan, 1985. 
Grisey, Gerard. Modulations (1976/77) for woodwinds: 2-2-2-2, brass: 
2-2-2, strings: 5-3-2-2, harp, and electric organ. Milan: Ricordi, 1978. 
. "Modulations pour 33 musiciens." In the record liner notes for 
Erato STU 71544. 
. "La musique: le devenir des sons." Darmstddter Beitrdge zur 
Neuen Musik 1982, 16-23. Mainz, London, New York: B. Schott's 
Sohne. 
. Partiels (1975) for two flutes, oboe, two clarinets, bass clarinet, 
one or two horns, percussion, accordion, two violins, two violas, 'cello 
and double-bass. Milan and Paris: Ricordi, 1978. 
"Partiels." In the record liner notes for Erato STU 71157. 
. Structuration des timbres dans la musique instrumentale." In 
Le timbre, metaphore pour la composition, ed. Jean-Baptiste Barriere, 
352-85. Paris: Christian Bourgeois/IRCAM, 1991. 
. "Tempus ex Machina: A Composer's Reflection on Musical 
Time." Contemporary Music Review 2 (1987): 241-77. French 
edition, "Tempus ex machina. Reflexions d'un compositeur sur le 
temps musical." Entretemps no. 8 (September 1989): 83-121. 
Transitoires (1980-81) for orchestra. Milan: Ricordi, 1981. 
Humbertclaude, Eric. "Les modeles perceptuels par simulation instru- 
mentale dans les oeuvres de Tristan Murail." Dissonanz/Disso-nance 
no. 13 (August 1987): 8-12. 38 

## Page 35

French Spectral Music 
Murail, Tristan. Gondwana (1980) for orchestra. Paris: Editions Musi- 
cales Transatlantiques, 1980. 
. "Gondwana." In the record liner notes for Editions Salabert 
SCD8902. 
. "Memoire/Erosion." In the record liner notes for SACEM 
SAPPHO-003. 
. "Questions de cible." Entretemps no.8 (September 1989): 147- 
74. 
. "La revolution des sons complexes." Darmstddter Beitrdge zur 
Neuen Musik 1980, 77-92. Mainz, London, New York: B. Schott's 
Sohne, 1981. 
. "Spectres et lutins." Darmstddter Beitrdge zur Neuen Musik 
1982, 24-34. Mainz, London, New York: B. Schott's S6hne, 1983. 
Trans. as "Spectra and Pixies," Contemporary Music Review 1 (1984): 
157-70. 
Stockhausen, Karlheinz. "... wie die Zeit vergeht .. ." In Die Reihe 
no.3. Vienna: Universal Edition, 1957. (English edition, titled ". .. 
How Time Passes . . . ," trans. Cornelius Cardew. Bryn Mawr: 
Theodore Presser Company, 1959. German text, annotated by Dr. 
Georg Heike, reprinted in Karlheinz Stockhausen, Texte zur Musik 1 
(Cologne: Verlag DuMont Schauberg, 1963), 99-139. English 
edition, trans. and ed. Jerome Kohl (Kiirten: Stockhausen Verlag, in 
preparation).) 39 

