# 

**Author:**   
**Subject:**   
**Total Pages:** 469  
**Source File:** `Geometry_of_Music.pdf`

---

**Part 4 of 24** (Pages 61-80)

---

## Page 61

theory 42
voices. Intuitively, voice leadings can be represented by phrases such as “move the 
C major triad to a C s diminished triad by shifting the note C up by semitone,” 
while chord progressions correspond to phrases such as “move the C major triad 
to the C s diminished triad however you want.” Mathematically, it turns out that 
voice leadings arise from uniform  applications of the permutation symmetry, while 
chord progressions arise from individual  applications of the permutation and car-
dinality-change symmetries. (These individual transformations destroy the iden-
tity of musical “voices,” since they change the two chords in different ways.) One 
way or another, voice leadings and chord progressions will occupy us for the rest 
of the book.
We’ll begin with voice leadings in pitch space,  which represent mappings from one 
collection of pitches to another.18 For example, Figure 2.5.2a presents the voice lead-
ing (G2, G3, B3, D4, F4) ®(C3, G3, C4, C4, E4), in which the voice sounding G2 in the 
ﬁ rst chord moves to C3 in the second chord, the voice sounding G3 in the ﬁ  rst chord 
continues to sound G3 in the second, the voice sounding B3 moves up to C4, and so 
on. (Note that I use an arrow to represent voice leadings.) Since the overall order in 
which the voices are listed is not signiﬁ  cant, one could also represent this voice lead-
ing as (F4, D4, G2, B3, G3) ®(E4, C4, C3, C4, 
G3); what matters is simply that we describe 
how the notes in one chord move to those in 
the next.19 Voice leadings are like the atomic 
constituents of musical scores, the basic build-
ing blocks of polyphonic music.
Clearly, the voice leading in Figure 2.5.2b 
is closely related to that in Figure 2.5.2a; 
all that has changed is the octave in which 
some voices appear. We can represent what is common to them by writing 
5, 0, 1, 2, 1(G, G, B, D, F) (C, G, C, C, E)--¾¾¾¾¾ ® . This indicates that one of the voices 
containing G, whatever octave it may be in, moves up ﬁ  ve semitones to C; the other 
voice containing G is held over into the next chord; the B moves up by semitone to 
C; and so on. I will refer to such octave-free voice leadings as voice leadings between 
pitch-class sets  or pitch-class voice leadings .20 The numbers above the arrow, here (5, 0, 
1, −2, −1), are paths in pitch-class space that describe how the voices move (§2.2). 
The two pitch-space voice leadings in Figure 2.5.2a–b are both instances  of the pitch-
class voice leading 5, 0, 1, 2, 1(G, G, B, D, F) (C, G, C, C, E)--¾¾¾¾¾ ® . Figure 2.5.2c is Figure 2.5.2 
Three voice 
leadings between 
G7 and C.
18 More formally, voice leadings in pitch space are equivalence classes of pairs of basic musical objects 
(ordered pitch sets) generated by uniform applications of the permutation symmetry.
19 In other words, we do not change the voice leading when we apply permutation uniformly.
20 Mathematically, voice leadings in pitch-class space are equivalence classes of progressions generated 
by uniform applications of the octave and permutation symmetries. Previous theorists (Roeder 1984, 1987, 
1994, Lewin 1998, Morris 1998, Straus 2003) deﬁ  ne voice leadings using traditional pitch-class intervals 
rather than “paths in pitch-class space” (§2.2). Hence they do not, for instance, distinguish one-semitone 
ascending motion from eleven-semitone descending motion. For more, see Tymoczko 2005, 2006, 2008b, 
and Callender, Quinn, and Tymoczko 2008.

## Page 62

Harmony and Voice Leading 43
not an instance of this voice leading, since G moves to C by seven descending semi-
tones rather than ﬁ  ve ascending semitones. (The speciﬁ  c path matters!) For simplic-
ity, I will omit the numbers over the arrow when the number of semitones moved 
by each voice lies in the range −6 < x £ 6. Thus I will write (G, G, B, D, F) ®(C, G, 
C, C, E) for the pitch-class voice leading in Figures 2.5.2a–b. This indicates that each 
voice moves by the shortest possible path  to its destination, with the arbitrary conven-
tion being that tritones ascend.
Pitch-class voice leadings are abstract schemas that are central to the enterprise 
of Western composition. Without them, a composer would need to conceptualize 
the voice leadings in Figure 2.5.3 as being entirely unrelated, and this would pose 
overwhelming burdens on his or her memory. It is far simpler, and more practical, to 
understand the two voice leadings as examples of a single principle: you can transform 
a C major triad into an F major triad by moving the E up by semitone and the G up by 
two semitones . The concept “pitch-class voice leading” is simply a tool for formalizing 
such principles, and thus for modeling one important aspect of the composer’s craft. 
Of course, in actual compositions voice leadings are always represented by speciﬁ  c 
pitches, and composers always think very carefully about register. Nevertheless, it is 
also true that composition requires a general sense of the various “routes” from chord 
to chord, and these routes are precisely what pitch-class voice 
leadings describe.
Geometrically, a pitch-space voice leading corresponds to 
a collection of paths in linear pitch space. Figure 2.5.4a repre-
sents the pitch-space voice leading in Figure 2.5.2a, with the 
dotted lines showing how each pitch moves to its destination. 
Similarly, a pitch-class voice leading can be represented as a Figure 2.5.3 
Two instances of 
the same voice-
leading schema.
Figure 2.5.4 
(a) Voice leadings in 
pitch space can be 
represented as paths on 
a line. ( b) Pitch-class 
voice leadings can be 
represented as paths on 
a circle. These paths can 
move in either direction 
by any distance, and 
may complete one or 
more circumferences of 
the circle.

## Page 63

theory 44
collection of paths in circular pitch-class space. In principle these paths can be arbi-
trarily long, with notes taking one or more complete turns around the pitch-class 
circle. Indeed, any collection of paths on the pitch-class circle, between any points 
whatsoever, deﬁ  nes a voice leading in pitch-class space. In some cases, it can be use-
ful to represent voice leadings by a continuous process (which could be shown as a 
movie) in which each note glides along the appropriate path to its destination, begin-
ning and ending at the same time.21
By contrast, chord progressions  (as I deﬁ  ne them) are simply successions of 
chords, with no implied mappings between their notes. Typically, the term “chord 
progression” is understood to refer to a sequence of unordered pitch-class sets . 
Thus {C, E, G, B f}Þ{E, G s, B}, or C7ÞE, is a chord progression whose ﬁ  rst chord 
is {C, E, G, B f} and whose second chord is {E, G s, B}, but which does not associ-
ate the note C with any particular note in the second chord.22 (Note that I use the 
double arrow for chord progressions, reserving the single arrow for voice leadings.) 
However, we could also deﬁ  ne a pitch-space chord progression  as a pair of unordered 
pitch sets, as in {C4, E4, G4} Þ{C4, F4, A4}. Again, there is no implication that 
the note E4 moves to F4 or to any other pitch in the chord. (When we are talking 
about chord progressions in pitch or pitch-class space, we are focusing on the 
harmo nies and ignoring how individual voices might happen to move.) Figure 
2.5.5 shows that chord progressions can be modeled as successions of unordered 
points in either linear pitch space or circular pitch-class space. Geometrically, we 
can imagine each chord occupying its own individual frame of a movie, with the 
motion between them being instantaneous and giving us no reason to associate any 
pair of notes.
Figure 2.5.6 summarizes this discussion, showing that each of these different the-
oretical concepts applies the ﬁ  ve OPTIC symmetries in different ways.
21 On the companion website I have provided a series of movies of this sort.
22 Mathematically, chord progressions result from the individual application of the octave, permuta-
tion, and cardinality-change symmetries.Figure 2.5.5 The chord progression {C, E, G, B f}Þ{E, G s, B}.

## Page 64

Harmony and Voice Leading 45
2.6 comparing voice leadings
We’ll now start to think about how voice leadings relate to one another. The 
 interesting wrinkle is that we’ll consider not just uniform  relationships, in which the 
same operation applies to both objects in a voice leading, but also their individual  
counterparts.
2.6.1 Individual and Uniform Transposition
The voice leadings (C, E, G) ®(C, F, A) and (G, B, D) ®(G, C, E) are very similar, 
exhibiting the same musical pattern at different transpositional levels: each holds the 
root of a major triad ﬁ  xed, moves the third up by semitone, and the ﬁ  fth up by two 
semitones (Figure 2.6.1). Since we transpose both chords in the same way, the two 
voice leadings are uniformly transpositionally related,  or uniformly T-related . The voice 
leadings (C, E, G) ®(C, F, A) and (G, B, D) ®(Fs, B, D s) are also similar, albeit slightly 
less so; each maps the root of the ﬁ  rst chord to the ﬁ  fth of the second, the third of 
the ﬁ  rst chord to the root of the second, and the ﬁ  fth of the ﬁ  rst chord to the third of 
the second. Figure 2.6.1b 
shows that one voice lead-
ing can be transformed 
into the other by apply-
ing a different  transposi-
tion to each chord: (C, 
E, G) is seven semitones 
away from (G, B, D), but 
(C, F, A) is six semitones 
away from (F s, B, D s). 
These voice leadings can thus be said to be individually transpositionally related,  or 
individually T-related .
2.6.2 Individual and Uniform Inversion
The distinction between individual and uniform relatedness extends naturally to inver-
sion. Figure 2.6.2a shows that (C, E, G) ®(C, F, A) can be inverted to produce (G, E f, 
C)®(G, D, B f). These are uniformly inversionally related  (or  uniformly I-related ) voice Term Symmetry
voice leading in pitch space uniform P
voice leading in pitch-class space uniform OP
pitch-space chord progression individual PC
chord progression individual OPC
path in pitch-class space uniform O
(one-note progressions only)Figure 2.5.6 
Music-
theoretical terms 
for progressions, 
along with the 
symmetries that 
generate them.
Figure 2.6.1 
Uniformly and 
individually 
T-related voice 
leadings.

## Page 65

theory 46
leadings. By contrast, (C, E, G) ®(C, F, A) and (G, E f, C)®(Gs, Ds, B) are individually 
inversionally related,  or individually I-related,  since it takes two different  inversions to 
transform the ﬁ  rst into the second. (Figure 2.6.2b inverts the ﬁ  rst chord around E ı4, 
or E quarter-tone ﬂ  at, while inverting the second around E4.) Note that as I am using 
the term, “individual I-relatedness” requires that each chord in the ﬁ  rst voice leading 
be related by some inversion to the corresponding chord in the second voice leading; 
it is not permissible to invert only one of the two chords.
The signiﬁ  cance of uniform transposition is clear, as it moves the same musical 
pattern to a different transpositional level. Uniform I-relatedness is somewhat more 
abstract: (C, E, G) ®(C, F, A) sounds rather different from (C, E f, G)®(Bf, D, G), 
which is uniformly I-related to it. Note however that the two voice leadings are mir-
ror images of each other: the ﬁ  rst moves one voice by zero semitones, one voice up by 
one semitone, and one voice up by two semitones; the second moves one voice by zero 
semitones, one voice down  by one semitone, and one voice down  by two semitones. 
The distances are the same but the directions have been reversed. Some theorists have 
asserted that individually I-related voice leadings are perceptually or metaphysically 
similar.23 From our perspective, what is more important is that the answers to theoreti-
cal questions often come in I-related pairs. For example, suppose we want to catalogue 
voice leadings between major and minor triads in which no voice moves by more than 
a semitone; since the inversion of any such “semitonal” voice leading is also semitonal, 
each of these voice leadings has an inversionally related partner (Figure 2.6.3). This 
makes it much easier to conceptualize and remember them.
The musical signiﬁ  cance of individual  T and I relationships is perhaps even less 
clear, since the voice leading 0, 1, 2(C, E, G) (C, F, A) ¾¾¾ ®  sounds like a standard I–IV 
chord progression, while 1, 0, 1(C, E, G) ( B, E, G )-¾¾¾ ® s, individually T-related to it, 
evokes Schubertian chromaticism. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which the two are 
similar: each relates structurally analogous notes (moving the root of the ﬁ  rst chord 
23 These include Hauptmann, Riemann, and contemporary “neo-Riemannians.” For more discussion, 
see Tymoczko 2008b and forthcoming.Figure 2.6.2 Uniformly and individually I-related voice 
leadings. Here, pitch-space inversion around E ı 4 (E quarter-
tone ﬂ  at, halfway between E f4 and E) sends C4 to G4, E4 to 
Ef4, F4 to D4, G4 to C4 and A4 to B f3.

## Page 66

Harmony and Voice Leading 47
to the ﬁ  fth of the second, the third of the ﬁ  rst chord to the root of the second, and the 
ﬁ fth of the ﬁ  rst to the third of the second); and the voices in the second voice leading 
end up exactly one semitone lower than in the ﬁ  rst (moving by −1, 0, and 1 semitones 
rather than 0, 1, and 2). Very similar points can be made about individually I-related 
voice leadings.24 We will see that it is often advantageous to focus on these sorts of 
relationships, as they allow us to make interesting analytical observations that would 
otherwise be very hard to express.
For example, Figure 2.6.4 compares the opening progressions in Wagner’s Tristan,  
Brahms’ Op. 76 No. 4, and Debussy’s Prelude to “The Afternoon of a Faun .”25 I think 
it is likely that both Brahms and Debussy, despite their ambiguous feelings about 
Wagner, had Tristan  somewhere in the backs of their minds: the opening gesture, by 
which a half-diminished seventh chord slides chromatically to a dominant seventh, 
is unmistakably Tristanesque. (Note that Brahms’ opening chord even uses the same 
pitch classes as Wagner’s.) But rather than blatantly copying Tristan,  both Brahms 
and Debussy do something similar to  yet different from  the earlier piece. The concept 
of individual T-relatedness provides a precise way to describe this sense of “similari-
ty-with-difference”: what Brahms and Debussy did, essentially, was transpose the sec-
ond chord in Tristan  up by semitone. (In Debussy’s case, he also transposes the entire 
voice leading by tritone, rearranging the voices somewhat.) In all three cases, the 
result is a two-semitone voice leading between half-diminished and dominant sev-
enth chords, an unfamiliar chromatic motion linking familiar chords.  Furthermore, Figure 2.6.3 The semitonal voice leadings between major and minor triads. Since 
inversion preserves the distance moved by each voice, these voice leadings can be 
grouped into uniformly I-related pairs.
24 Individual transposition adds a constant to the numbers representing the paths in a voice leading; 
individual inversion subtracts these numbers from a constant (see Tymoczko 2008b).
25 I have removed Wagner’s “voice crossings,” as will be discussed in Chapter 8.

## Page 67

theory 48
all three voice leadings move root to root, third to third, ﬁ  fth to ﬁ  fth, and seventh to 
seventh. Y et at the same time, the connection to Tristan  has been disguised: what has 
been borrowed is not the progression itself, but 
rather something more abstract—a general 
voice-leading schema rather than a particular 
way of resolving the half-diminished chord. 
(Thus we see how theoretically savvy compos-
ers can steal without getting caught!) Whether 
this is a matter of defusing, one-upping, or 
“correcting” Wagner is an interesting critical 
question.
In classical music, individually T-related 
voice leadings often appear in sequential con-
texts. Figure 2.6.5a presents a nice example 
from the opening of Mozart’s C minor Fantasy, 
K. 475. The music invokes a relatively standard chromatic sequence in which iv6–V7 
chord progressions move downward by major second: beginning with A7, we have 
f 6–G7 followed by what we expect to be e f6–F7. But Mozart transposes the last chord 
up by semitone so that the ﬁ  nal pair is individually T-related to the pair preceding it, 
with the sequence ending on F s7 rather than the expected F7. This maneuver, which 
transforms a minor-key iv6–V7 progression into a major-key iii6–V7 progression, is 
reasonably common in tonal music. Figure 2.6.5b cites an analogous progression 
from the recapitulation of the ﬁ  rst movement of Beethoven’s E f major Piano Sonata, 
Op. 31 No. 3.26 Here the sequence moves downward by diatonic thirds, with each 
chord preceded by its applied dominant. If the passage were strictly sequential, it 
would cycle through all seven diatonic triads before returning to the tonic E f; how-
ever, Beethoven arranges an earlier return by inserting a descending diatonic second  
into the sequence of thirds. Once again, the structural similarity of the voice leadings Figure 2.6.4 The opening 
progressions in Wagner’s Tristan  (a), 
Brahms’ Intermezzo Op. 76 No. 4 
(b), and Debussy’s Prelude to “The 
Afternoon of a Faun.”
Figure 2.6.5 Individually T-related voice leadings in sequential passages from 
Mozart ( a) and Beethoven ( b).
26 A very similar sequence appears at m. 45 of the ﬁ  rst movement of Beethoven’s F major piano sonata, 
Op. 54.

## Page 68

Harmony and Voice Leading 49
masks the deviation from strict sequential procedure: we hear successive voice lead-
ings as being similar, even though they are not related by exact transposition. Again, 
the concept of “individual T-relatedness” provides a precise tool for describing this 
sort of similarity.
2.7 voice-leading size
Polyphonic music uses independent melodies to articulate efﬁ  cient voice leadings 
between meaningful harmonies (Figure 2.7.1). T o be sure, it also involves follow-
ing many other rules that are particular to speciﬁ  c styles and time periods: in some 
genres, for example, parallel perfect ﬁ  fths are forbidden, while in others they are 
allowed. (Similarly, in some genres the bass is more likely to move by leap, while in 
others the bass is essentially similar to the other voices.) Later chapters will deal with 
these style-speciﬁ  c nuances. For now, I want to focus on the basic conditions under 
which polyphony itself is possible.
Clearly, to write this sort of music, composers need to be able to compare the 
overall efﬁ  ciency, or “size,” of different voice leadings. But how is this done? In 
some situations, comparisons seem unproblematic: for instance, a voice leading 
that moves just one note by just one semitone seems obviously smaller than a voice 
leading that moves three notes by six semitones each. But other cases are consider-
ably more difﬁ  cult. Is (C, E, G) ®(Df, F, A f) larger or smaller than (C, E, G) ®(C, 
E, A)? The ﬁ  rst voice leading moves its voices by a greater total distance (three semi-
tones vs. two semitones), while in the second, the largest distance moved is greater 
(two semitones vs. one semitone). Which is more important? Is the smaller voice 
leading the one that minimizes the total amount of motion or the largest distance 
moved by any voice?
Although pedagogues have long enjoined their students to use small voice lead-
ings, they have never bothered to provide speciﬁ  c answers to these sorts of questions. 
(Students, it seems, are supposed to intuit which of the available voice leadings is the 
smallest.) More recently, theorists have proposed a variety of very precise methods 
of measuring voice-leading size. Unfortunately, musical practice does not allow us 
to adjudicate between these different proposals, leaving us with many plausible but 
incompatible solutions to the same problem. Rather than adopting one of these, my 
strategy here is to try to remain as neutral as possible about the issue. (Precision is a 
virtue only when it is not arbitrarily imposed!) Happily, it turns out that “reasonable” 
measures of voice-leading size agree about a number of important cases.
Figure 2.7.1 The opening phrase of the Bach chorale 
“O Herzensangst.” This music can be represented as the 
sequence of voice leadings (E f, G, E f, Bf)®(Ef, Bf, 
Ef, G)7, 2,0,5--¾¾¾ ¾ ®(Af, Af, Ef, C)®(Af, F, D, B f). I have 
ignored the starred (“nonharmonic”) note at the end of 
the ﬁ  rst measure.

## Page 69

theory 50
I consider a measure of voice-leading 
size to be “reasonable” if it satisﬁ  es two basic 
requirements: ﬁ  rst, it should depend only 
on how far  the individual voices move, with 
larger motion leading to larger voice lead-
ings; and second, it should judge voice lead-
ings with voice crossings  to be larger (or at 
the very least, no smaller) than their natural 
uncrossed alternatives. This is illustrated by 
Figure 2.7.2. The ﬁ  rst requirement is basic to the very notion of voice-leading size; 
the second mandates a kind of musical “division of labor,” according to which it is 
preferable to have more voices moving by small amounts, rather than fewer voices 
moving by larger amounts. (The connection between avoiding voice crossings and 
the division of musical labor is not obvious, although it can be proved mathemati-
cally.27) Thus Figure 2.7.3a, in which two voices move by three and four semitones, 
should be at least as small as Figure 2.7.3b, in which one voice moves by seven 
semitones. Both principles are consistent with Western musical practice, and to my 
knowledge no composer, theorist, or pedagogue has ever proposed a method of 
measuring voice leading that violates either principle.28
Appendix A summarizes the technical 
issues involved in measuring voice lead-
ing. For our purposes, the important point 
is that the two constraints are powerful 
enough to imply a number of theoretical 
results: for instance, they imply that the 
more evenly a chord divides the octave, 
the smaller the voice leadings to its vari-
ous transpositions; they also imply that E 
and A f major triads can be linked to the 
C major triad by smaller voice leadings 
than any other major triads. Indeed, the 
constraints are so powerful that, in many 
contexts, it is unnecessary to specify a par-
ticular method of measuring voice leading, 
because all reasonable metrics will agree. For most of this book, we will therefore be 
able to speak of “large” and “small” voice leadings without getting into the details of 
how to measure voice leading. Readers should feel comfortable trusting their musi-
cal intuitions, interpreting the term “efﬁ  cient voice leading” as a synonym for “voice 
leadings in which all voices move by short distances.”Figure 2.7.2 The principle of avoiding 
crossings tells us that ( a) should be no 
larger than ( b) and ( c) should be no 
larger than ( d).
Figure 2.7.3 Generally speaking, Western 
composers prefer smaller amounts of 
motion in more voices ( a) to larger 
amounts of motion in fewer voices ( b). 
The pattern in ( a) is common in the inner 
voices in classical music; ( c) provides an 
example from the Bach chorale “Nun lob’ 
mein’ Seel’ den Herren.”
27 See Tymoczko 2006.
28 It bears repeating that this notion of voice-leading size is meant to model composers’ behavior 
rather than listeners’ experience. See Callender and Rogers 2006 for some work on listeners’ judgments of 
 voice-leading distance.

## Page 70

Harmony and Voice Leading 51
2.8 near identity
So far we have grouped chords into categories based on transpositional and inver-
sional equivalence. But this insistence on exact  equivalence is actually quite restric-
tive: in many contexts, it is useful to describe two chords as being similar even though 
they are not exactly the same.29 This is particularly important when investigating 
matters of intonation and tuning: for instance, music theorists might speak about 
the “acoustically pure perfect ﬁ  fth {C, G},” the “equal-tempered ﬁ  fth {C, G},” the 
 “quarter-comma meantone perfect ﬁ  fth {C, G}” and so on. The language suggests 
that these different tunings are variations on the same object, which may come in 
a variety of closely related forms. Y et from our perspective the different tunings of 
{C, G} belong to different chord types, since no transposition or inversion relates 
them. Thus there is a mismatch between ordinary musical thinking and the extremely 
precise terminology we have been developing.
The problem is not limited to matters of tuning and intonation. The dominant 
seventh chord {C, E, G, B f} is in the grand scheme of things rather similar to the 
minor seventh {C, E f, G, B f}, which differs only in that it has an E f rather than E n. 
Although they do not belong to the same set class, the two chords are clearly more 
similar to each other than either is to the dissonant cluster {F s, G, A f, A}. Conse-
quently, {C, E, G, B f}Þ{C, E f, G, B f} feels like a progression between two more-or-
less similar chords, while {C, E, G, B f}Þ{Fs, G, A f, A} is quite jarring, connecting 
very different harmonies. Our discussion, rather than trying to model to this fact, has 
instead treated harmonic identity as an all-or-nothing affair.
It therefore seems that exact identity stands at one end of a continuum  of musical 
relatedness. The equal-tempered chord {C, E, G, B f} is exactly identical to itself, and 
is very closely related to the just-intonation chord {C, E, G, B f}. Both of these chords 
are somewhat related to the minor-seventh chord {C, E f, G, B f}, and are not very 
similar at all to the chromatic cluster {F s, G, A f, A}. Notice that these “degrees of 
relatedness” seem to mirror facts about voice leading: there is a very small voice lead-
ing from the equal-tempered {C, E, G, B f} to its just-intonation counterpart, and 
a reasonably small voice leading from {C, E, G, B f} to {C, E f, G, B f}, but it takes a 
relatively large voice leading to get from {C, E, G, B f} to {F s, G, A f, A}. This suggests 
that we may be able to use voice leading to model at least some of our intuitions of 
musical similarity.30
Metaphors of distance are useful here. We can think of the acoustically pure per-
fect ﬁ  fth {0, 7.01} as being close  to the equal-tempered ﬁ  fth {0, 7}, as if the two chords 
were nearby in some abstract “space of all chords.” Conversely, the chord {3, 4} is 
29 The notion of similarity is central to the work of Ian Quinn (1996, 2001, 2006).
30 In principle, voice leading provides just one of many possible notions of musical distance. We might 
sometimes want to conceive of musical distance harmonically (based on common tones or shared interval 
content), or in a way that privileges membership in the same diatonic scale—so that the F major triad is 
closer to C major than E major is. (See, for example, Quinn 2001, 2006, and 2007, and Tymoczko, forth-
coming.) However, we will see that conceptions based on voice leading are extremely versatile and can be 
useful in a wide range of contexts.

## Page 71

theory 52
much farther from {0, 7} than {0, 7.01} is, since it takes a larger voice leading to 
connect {3, 4} to {0, 7}. Chapter 3 will show that this talk of distance is not just a 
metaphor: it is possible to describe geometrical spaces containing all chords with a 
particular number of notes, and in which the distance between any two chords cor-
responds to the size of the minimal voice leading between them. Musical “similar-
ity” can therefore be represented by distance in these spaces. In anticipation of this 
discussion, I will say that chords are “near” or “close to” each other when they can be 
linked by efﬁ  cient voice leading.
We can extend these ideas to chord types as well. Two chord types can be said 
to be similar if there is a relatively small voice leading between their transpositions. 
Thus the diminished triad is closer to the minor triad than to the chromatic cluster, 
since there is a very small voice leading taking C diminished to C minor, but no simi-
larly small voice leading connecting any diminished triad to any chromatic cluster.31 
Another way to make the point is to say that any particular diminished triad is nearly 
transpositionally related  to any minor triad: for example, C diminished is nearly trans-
positionally related to F minor, since {C, E f, Gf} is near  {C, E f, G} which is in turn 
transpositionally related to {F, A f, C}. In the same spirit, we could say that {C, D f, G} 
is nearly inversionally related  to {E f, G, A}, meaning that {C, D f, G} is near {C, D, F s}, 
which is inversionally related to {E f, G, A}. What results is a more ﬂ  exible conception 
of harmonic similarity: rather than considering two chords to be similar only when 
they are exactly  related by transposition or inversion, we can consider them similar 
when they are nearly (or approximately ) related by these same transformations. This 
is useful insofar as actual composers are often more concerned with approximate 
than with exact musical relationships.
2.9  harmony and counterpoint revisited
In Chapter 1, we observed that Western music has a kind of two-dimensional coher-
ence: vertical or harmonic principles dictate that chords should be audibly similar, 
while horizontal or contrapuntal principles dictate that chords should be connected 
by efﬁ  cient voice leading. Figure 2.9.1 shows these constraints operating in a wide 
range of different Western styles, including classical music, contemporary jazz, late-
nineteenth-century chromaticism, and even modern atonality. T o be sure, composers 
often deviate from these norms for expressive reasons—just as, when driving, one 
sometimes takes a scenic detour rather than following the most direct route. And to 
be sure, different styles always involve additional constraints over and above these 
very basic norms. But the norms themselves are relatively robust, shared by a wide 
range of styles spanning several centuries.
31 The single-semitone voice leading (C, E f, Gf)®(C, E f, G) links diminished to minor, but it takes at 
least four semitones to link a diminished triad to a chromatic cluster.

## Page 72

Harmony and Voice Leading 53
So under what circumstances is it possible to ﬁ  nd an efﬁ  cient voice leading 
between nearly transpositionally or inversionally related chords? In other words, how 
is it possible to write music that is both harmonically and melodically coherent?
Chapter 1 noted that this is possible when a chord divides the octave very evenly 
or very unevenly. Here I want to replace the contrast “even/uneven” with the more 
powerful concept of near symmetry . It turns out that one can combine harmonic 
consistency and efﬁ  cient voice leading only by using nearly symmetrical  chords, 
which are typically near chords that are completely symmetrical  under transposition, 
inversion, or reordering. Nearly even chords (such as the major triad) are near the 
symmetrical chords that divide the octave perfectly evenly (such as the augmented 
triad). Clustered chords (such as {B, C, C s}) are near the symmetrical chords that 
contain many copies of one speciﬁ  c pitch class (such as the “triple unison” {C, C, 
C}). But there are other symmetrical chords as well: transpositionally symmetrical 
chords such as {C, C s, Fs, G}, which do not divide the octave particularly evenly, 
and inversionally symmetrical chords such as {C, D, E}, which are neither particu-
larly even nor particularly uneven. Thus an approach based on symmetry leads to a 
much deeper understanding of the fundamental connection between harmony and 
counterpoint—opening our eyes to new compositional possibilities and revealing 
regularities latent in the music of the past.
We will begin by considering efﬁ  cient voice leading between chords exactly  related 
by transposition or inversion; then, at the end of the section, we will broaden the 
discussion to include near transposition or near inversion.
2.9.1 Transposition
A chord is transpositionally symmetrical if it is unchanged by some transposition. 
Thus, when we transpose an augmented triad by a major third, we produce the same 
pitch classes we started with. Figure 2.9.2 shows that there are two kinds of transposi-
tionally symmetrical chords, those that divide the pitch-class circle evenly and those Figure 2.9.1 Harmonic consistency and efﬁ  cient voice leading in a range of styles. ( a) A 
common upper-voice pattern for the classical I–IV–I–V–I chord progression. ( b) A common 
jazz-piano “left-hand voicing” for the descending-ﬁ  fths progression D7–G7–C7–F7. The voicings 
add ninths and thirteenths and omit roots, ﬁ  fths, and elevenths, as is common in jazz. ( c) Two 
celebrated examples of Wagnerian chromaticism; the ﬁ  rst is a simpliﬁ  cation of the opening of 
Tristan  and the second is the opening of The Ring’s  “Tarnhelm” motif. ( d) Chromatic clusters 
of the sort often found in late twentieth-century music, particularly in the music of Ligeti and 
Lutosławski.

## Page 73

theory 54
that can be decomposed into equal-size subsets that do so.32 For example, {B, C, F, F s} 
does not divide the circle into four even parts, but it can be decomposed into a pair 
of tritones that each divide the circle in half.
If a chord is near one of these symmetrical chords, then it can be linked by efﬁ  -
cient voice leading to some of its transpositions. Consider {C, E, G}, which is near 
{C, E, G s} since the voice leading (C, E, G) ®(C, E, G s) is small. It follows that the E 
major chord must also be near the C augmented triad. This is because we can trans-
pose the small voice leading (C, E, G) ®(C, E, G s) uniformly by ascending major 
third, obtaining (E, G s, B)®(E, G s, C). This is an efﬁ  cient voice leading from E major 
to C augmented. Figure 2.9.3 shows that we can retrograde this second voice leading 
and attach it to the earlier one, producing (C, E, G) ®(C, E, G s)®(B, E, G s). Here 
we have the conjunction of two small voice leadings. Removing the middle chord will 
give a small voice leading from C major to E major: (C, E, G) ®(B, E, G s). In other 
words, if C major is close to an augmented triad, then its major third transposition 
must also be close to that same augmented triad, and since C and E major are both 
close to the same chord, they must also be close to each other.
Of course, there is nothing particularly special about major or augmented chords. 
Take any chord A close to a symmetrical chord S that is unchanged by transposi-
tion Tx. Then Tx(A) will also be close to Tx(S), which is the same as S; and since A 
and Tx(A) are both near S, they are also near each other. Speaking somewhat meta-
phorically, the symmetrical chord passes on its symmetry to nearby chords in the 
form of efﬁ  cient voice leading. These nearby chords are not themselves symmetrical, 
but they are nearly  so, which is to say that they can be linked to their x-semitone 
transpositions by efﬁ  cient voice leading. It follows that transpositional symmetry is 
32 See Starr and Morris (1977).Figure 2.9.2 Transpositionally symmetrical chords either divide the octave evenly ( a), or can 
be decomposed into equal-size subsets that themselves do so ( b). Here, the transpositionally 
symmetrical chord {C, F, F s, B} can be decomposed into tritones {C, F s} and {B, F}.

## Page 74

Harmony and Voice Leading 55
a limiting case of efﬁ  cient voice leading: as chord A moves closer and closer toward a 
transpositionally symmetrical chord, the size of the minimal voice leading between 
A and Tx(A) decreases, reaching zero when the chord is exactly symmetrical.
Let’s consider a second example. The chord {B, C, E, F s} appears commonly in 
jazz, but does not divide the octave particularly evenly. However, it is near the trans-
positionally symmetric {B, C, F, F s}, which contains two separate tritones. Beginning 
with the small voice leading (B, C, E, F s)®(B, C, F, F s), we transpose by tritone to 
produce (F, G f, Bf, C)®(F, G f, B, C) (Figure 2.9.4). Retrograding this and gluing it 
to the original voice leading, we obtain (B, C, E, F s)®(B, C, F, F s)®(Bf, C, F, G f). 
Removing the middle chord gives (B, C, E, F s)®(Bf, C, F, G f), which efﬁ  ciently links 
tritone-related chords. Chapter 10 will show that this sort of voice leading plays a role 
in jazz “tritone substitutions.” For now, however, the focus should be on the general 
form of the argument: since chord 
A is close to the tritone-symmetri-
cal chord S, then so is the tritone 
transposition of A; and since A and 
its tritone transposition are close to 
the same chord, they must also be 
close to each other.
There is one complication that 
should be mentioned here. Sup-
pose a three-note chord, such as 
{C, F, F s}, is near a  transpositionally Figure 2.9.3 Any chord that is near an augmented triad can be connected to its major-third 
transposition by efﬁ  cient voice leading.
Figure 2.9.4 Since both {C, E, F s, B} and its tritone 
transposition are close to {B, C, F, F s} (a−b), they 
are close to each other. In ( c), we retrograde the 
voice leading in ( b) and attach it to ( a). Removing 
the middle chord gives us the voice leading in ( d).

## Page 75

theory 56
 symmetrical two-note chord, such as {C, F s} (Figure 2.9.5). Proceeding as we did ear-
lier, we begin with the three-voice voice leading (C, F, F s)®(C, F s, Fs); retrograding 
and transposing by tritone we obtain (F s, C, C) ®(Fs, B, C). Note that we cannot 
simply glue these two voice leadings together, since (C, F s, Fs) is not the same as (F s, 
C, C). However, if we double a voice in each voice leading, we can attach them. What 
results is a four-voice  voice leading between {C, F, F s} and its tritone transposition, (C, 
C, F, F s)®(C, C, F s, Fs)®(B, C, F s, Fs) or (C, C, F, F s)®(B, C s, Fs, Fs) upon remov-
ing the middle chord. The fourth voice is the price the three-note chord has to pay 
for exploiting the symmetry of a two-note chord. In general, extra voices will always  
be necessary whenever a larger chord exploits the symmetries of a smaller chord. In 
Chapter 7 we will see that there are common tonal routines, such as the voice leading 
(C, C, E, G) ®(A, C, F, F), which exploit this very procedure (§7.2). It follows that the 
familiar major triad is special not just because it divides the octave into three nearly 
even parts, but also because it is reasonably close to the tritone.
2.9.2 Inversion
A chord will be unchanged by inversion if its notes are arranged symmetrically 
around an “axis of symmetry” crossing the pitch-class circle at two antipodal points, 
with tones placed freely on either of these points. For example, Figure 2.9.6 shows 
that the axis of the inversionally symmetrical {C, D, E} contains the notes D and A f; 
since C and E are arranged symmetrically around this axis, inversion around D leaves 
the chord unchanged.
The nonsymmetrical chord {C, D s, E} is near {C, D, E}, since the voice leading 
(C, D s, E)®(C, D, E) is small. Inverting this entire voice leading around the ﬁ  xed Figure 2.9.5 A larger chord can take advantage of the symmetries of a smaller chord, but it 
requires additional voices.

## Page 76

Harmony and Voice Leading 57
point D produces (C, D f, E)®(C, D, E). Reversing this voice leading and gluing it 
to the earlier one produces (C, D s, E)®(C, D, E) ®(C, D f, E). Removing the middle 
chord gives us a small voice leading between inversionally related chords: (C, D s, 
E)®(C, D f, E) (Figure 2.9.7). As in the transpositional case, the inversionally sym-
metrical chord passes its symmetry on to nearby chords: if chord A is near a chord S 
that is invariant under some inversion x
yI, then x
yI(A) will also be near S, and hence A 
and x
yI(A) can be linked by efﬁ  cient voice leading.
Figure 2.9.8 provides a real-world example. We begin with the efﬁ  cient voice 
leading (F, A f, Cf, Ef)®(F, A f, Cf, D), which uses a single-semitone motion to 
transform the F half-diminished chord into a fully diminished seventh. The next 
voice leading inverts the ﬁ  rst uniformly around A4/B f4, producing an efﬁ  cient voice Figure 2.9.6 T o form an inversionally symmetrical 
chord, choose two antipodal points to act as an 
axis of symmetry—here, {D, A f}. One can place 
notes on either axis point (or both), as they will 
be unaffected by the inversion. For any points 
not lying on the axis, such as a, one must also 
add its inversional partner, symmetrically placed 
on the other side of the axis. Here, a is 60° 
counterclockwise from the upper axis point, while 
a' is 60° clockwise from that point. The antipodal 
points can also lie between  equal-tempered pitch 
classes.
Figure 2.9.7 Any chord that is near an inversionally symmetrical chord can be connected 
to its inversion by efﬁ  cient voice leading.

## Page 77

theory 58
leading from the E dominant seventh to the same diminished seventh chord. In 
Figure 2.9.8c we reverse this and glue it to the ﬁ  rst voice leading. Removing the 
symmetrical chord gives us an efﬁ  cient voice leading from F half-diminished to E7, 
strongly reminiscent of the opening of Tristan . We conclude that this celebrated 
nineteenth-century progression exploits the near I-symmetry of the half-diminished 
and dominant seventh chords.
2.9.3 Permutation
The third symmetry is a little bit different from the others. Suppose we model chords 
as multisets  that may contain multiple copies of a single note. From this point of view, 
the chord {C, C, C} is different from {C, C}, since they have a different number of cop-
ies of the note C. Let’s also imagine that (contrary to fact) we could somehow keep 
track of these different copies, which we can represent with subscripts like {Ca, Cb, Cc}. 
Now consider (Ca, Cb, Cc)®(Cc, Ca, Cb), a voice leading that permutes the notes in the 
chord {C, C, C}. Since none of the voices in this voice leading actually moves, we can 
say that {C, C, C} is permutationally symmetrical . “Permutation symmetry” is just a 
fancy synonym for “has multiple copies of one or more of its notes.”
Permutationally symmetrical chords are themselves rather boring, but the nearby  
chords are quite interesting. The chromatic cluster {B, C, D f} is near {C, C, C} since 
(B, C, D f)®(C, C, C) is small. Retrograding and reordering voices, we obtain (C, C, 
C)®(C, D f, B). Gluing the two voice leadings together gives us (B, C, D f)®(C, C, 
C)®(C, D f, B); upon removing the middle chord, we obtain (B, C, D f)®(C, D f, 
B), a small voice leading from {B, C, D f} to itself. (Figure 2.9.9 attempts, somewhat 
lamely, to illustrate.) Once again, the symmetrical chord passes its symmetry on to 
nearby chords: given a small voice leading A®S, from chord A to the permutation-
ally symmetrical chord S, we can permute both chords uniformly to obtain the small 
voice leading P(A)®P(S), or P(A)®S, since S is permutationally symmetrical. Retro-
grading and gluing together gives us A®S®P(A); upon removing the middle chord, 
we have A®P(A), an efﬁ  cient voice leading between A and itself. The general proce-
dure here is precisely the same as in the cases of transposition and inversion; the only 
difference is the nature of the symmetry.Figure 2.9.8 The F half-diminished chord is close to a diminished seventh chord ( a). 
Inverting this voice leading uniformly around A4/B f4, we get an efﬁ  cient voice leading from 
E7 to the same diminished chord. In ( c), we retrograde the voice leading in ( b) and attach it 
to (a). Removing the middle chord ( d ) gives us an efﬁ  cient voice leading from the 
F half-diminished chord to E7, a voice leading that plays a central role in Wagner’s Tristan .

## Page 78

Harmony and Voice Leading 59
It may seem surprising to place permutation alongside transposition and inver-
sion, since we are accustomed to thinking of chords as inherently unordered objects. 
But the discussion in §2.4 should ameliorate any feelings of unease: we form chords 
by abstracting away from the order of the notes in a musical object, just as we form 
set classes by abstracting away from the distinction between transpositionally and 
inversionally related objects. And just as transpositionally symmetrical chords are 
special (because there are fewer transpositions to abstract away from) so too are per-
mutationally symmetrical chords (because there are fewer orderings to abstract away 
from). Voice leading reveals this “specialness” by providing a musical mechanism for 
rearranging the notes in an unordered chord. As a result, it should not be too sur-
prising that there is a close analogy between permutational symmetry and the more 
familiar symmetries considered previously. Transpositional near-symmetry guaran-
tees efﬁ  cient voice leading between transpositionally related chords; inversional near-
symmetry guarantees efﬁ  cient voice leading between inversionally related chords; and 
permutational near-symmetry guarantees efﬁ  cient voice leading between a chord and 
itself. Here we see the advantages of a more ﬂ  exible approach to chord classiﬁ  cation, 
in which we embrace a wide variety of musical transformations. From our point of 
view, permutation is just another kind of symmetry, with its own distinctive collec-
tion of musical consequences.
The arguments in this section show that if a chord is near a symmetrical chord 
then it will inherit this symmetry in the form of efﬁ  cient voice leadings. One might 
also wonder whether the converse is true: is it the case that if there is an efﬁ  cient 
voice leading from a chord A to one of its transpositions or inversions, then chord 
A is nearly symmetrical under transposition, inversion, or permutation? That is, is it Figure 2.9.9 Any chord that is near a chord with pitch-class duplications can be connected 
to its untransposed form by efﬁ  cient voice leading.

## Page 79

theory 60
the case that our three symmetries are the only symmetries there are —the only sym-
metries we need to understand if we want to know how to combine efﬁ  cient voice 
leading with harmonic consistency? Basically, the answer is “yes,” at least insofar as 
we understand the term “harmonically consistent” to mean “using chords that are 
approximately related by transposition or inversion.”33 It follows that every instance 
of efﬁ  cient voice leading between structurally similar chords—in any scale or tuning 
system—can be understood in terms of the three basic symmetries we have just dis-
cussed. This is precisely what will allow us, in Part II, to interpret a large number of 
Western musical practices as variations on the same basic techniques.
It is very important to realize that the symmetrical chords relevant to voice lead-
ing will not necessarily lie on the ordinary piano keyboard. The familiar pentatonic 
scale, {C, D, F, G, B f} or {0, 2, 5, 7, 10}, is quite close to the chord that divides the 
octave into ﬁ  ve equal pieces: {0, 2.4, 4.8, 7.2, 9.6}. Consequently, the pentatonic scale 
can be efﬁ  ciently linked to its transpositions, as in (C, D, F, G, B f)®(C, D, F, G, A). 
While both of these chords belong to the equal-tempered universe, and can be played 
on an ordinary piano, the perfectly even ﬁ  ve-note chord does not. Y et this missing 
chord nevertheless exerts its inﬂ  uence on twelve-tone equal-tempered music; indeed, 
twelve-tone equal-tempered ﬁ  ve-note chords can be linked to their transpositions by 
efﬁ cient voice leading only if they are close to this phantasmic and elusive chord. This 
is just one of many cases where a deep understanding of the discrete musical universe 
requires us to think in continuous terms. Even though we are ultimately concerned 
with equal-tempered music, we ﬁ  nd that we can understand this music best when we 
consider the continuous space in which equal temperaments are embedded.34
33 It is relatively easy to demonstrate the connection between efﬁ  cient voice leading and near sym-
metry; the harder point is to explain the circumstances under which nearly symmetrical chords are near 
chords that are perfectly symmetrical. (This becomes clear only when we examine the geometrical spaces 
described in Chapter 3.) With respect to the ﬁ  rst issue, here is a simple argument connecting efﬁ  cient voice 
leading and near symmetry. Suppose there is some function F over the pitch classes, which could be a 
transposition or an inversion or something else altogether. Now let us suppose that there is some efﬁ  cient 
voice leading between chords A and F(A). We can therefore represent A®F(A) as the product of two sepa-
rate voice leadings ( ai, aj, ak, . . .)®(ax, ay, az, . . .)®(F(ax), F(ay), F(az), . . .). The ﬁ  rst of these rearranges the 
notes of A while the second simply applies F to each note. (The ﬁ  rst voice leading need not be a permuta-
tion, and it may involve doublings.) Now consider ( ax, ay, az, . . .)®(ai, aj, ak, . . .) and ( ax, ay, az, . . .)®(F(ax), 
F(ay), F(az), . . .). These voice leadings must be approximately equal. (This follows from the fact that the 
original voice leading is efﬁ  cient, and hence moves none of its voices very far.) The ﬁ  rst rearranges the 
notes of A, the second applies F to each note; hence there is some rearrangement that is approximately 
equal to applying F. This is just what it means to be nearly symmetrical under F.
34 John Clough (in unpublished work) and Rick Cohn (1996, 1997) articulated a special case of the 
central claim of this section, observing that major and minor triads are a semitone away from augmented 
chords, and that this allows them to be connected by efﬁ  cient chromatic voice leading. (Cohn further 
generalizes to chromatic scales whose size is divisible by three, and speculates that analogous claims can 
be made about tetrachords and hexachords in the standard chromatic scale.) This section generalizes this 
important observation by articulating a somewhat broader principle: if a chord A is near a chord that is 
F-symmetrical, then A and F(A) can be connected by efﬁ  cient voice leading. I also observe that the con-
verse of this statement is true: if A and F(A) can be connected by efﬁ  cient voice leading, then A is nearly 
symmetrical under F (see the preceding note). Furthermore, my notion of “nearness” is somewhat more 
general, since I consider chords like {C, E, G} to be “near” {C, F s}. I also show that the symmetrical chord 
need not appear in the relevant scale—for instance, the diatonic collection is near the equiheptatonic col-
lection, which does not appear in the twelve-tone chromatic scale.

## Page 80

Harmony and Voice Leading 61
Finally, note that nothing really changes when we adopt the more ﬂ  exible notion 
of harmonic relatedness discussed in §2.8. For suppose we would like to ﬁ  nd an 
efﬁ cient voice leading between two chords A and B that are nearly —rather than 
precisely— transpositionally or inversionally related. Since A is nearly transposition-
ally or inversionally related to B, there is a small voice leading F(A)®B, where F is 
some transposition or inversion. And if the voice leading A®B is small, then the voice 
leading A®F(A) must also be small, as both A and F(A) will be close to B. In the 
cases of musical interest, F will be some nonzero transposition or inversion, which 
means that A is itself nearly symmetrical.35 (The same argument shows that B must 
also be nearly symmetrical.) Thus, expanding our notion of “harmonic consistency” 
does not expand the realm of musical possibilities: a chord A can be linked by efﬁ  -
cient voice leading to one of its near -transpositions or near -inversions only if A is 
itself nearly symmetrical under transposition, inversion, or permutation.
2.10  acoustic consonance and near 
evenness
We now return to acoustic consonance, the second of our ﬁ  ve basic components of 
tonality. Recall that Western listeners tend to agree that certain chords sound stable 
and restful, or consonant, while others sound unstable and harsh, or dissonant. Many, 
though not all, Western styles exploit this difference: consonant sonorities tend to 
appear as musical destinations or at points of rest, while dissonant sonorities tend to 
be more active and unstable. T o be sure, the distinction between consonance and dis-
sonance is extremely complex, and it maps only indirectly onto the concept of musi-
cal stability. (There are situations when an acoustically consonant sonority behaves as 
if it were musically unstable.) But to a ﬁ  rst approximation, it is reasonable to say that 
in many musical styles, dissonant sonorities tend to resolve to consonant sonorities.
Acoustic consonance is somewhat imperfectly understood, and there are a num-
ber of theories about what produces it.36 Nevertheless, there is broad agreement on 
some basic principles. The eighteenth-century mathematician Jean-Baptiste Fourier 
showed that any periodic mathematical function can be represented as the sum of 
sine and cosine waves whose frequencies are integer multiples of a single frequency 
f (Figure 2.10.1). In the case of a musical sound, these sine waves are called partials . 
35 There are some subtleties here that I am glossing over. More precisely, the cases of musical interest 
are those where F is either an inversion or nontrivial transposition, or where F is the identity operation 
and the voice leading F(A)®B involves some nontrivial permutation. When these conditions are not met, 
then our argument simply records the boring fact that any chord can be transformed into some other 
chords by moving its notes by small distances: for example, that a major triad can be transformed into a 
minor triad by lowering its third. The musically interesting cases are those in which small voice leadings 
lead to an interesting reshufﬂ  ing of the resulting notes. For instance, if we think of a minor triad as a major 
triad with lowered third, then the voice leading (C, E, G) ®(B, E, G) is interesting because it does not simply 
lower the third; instead, it is an efﬁ  cient voice leading in which the root of the major triad becomes the ﬁ fth 
of the minor triad. Here, we are exploiting the near symmetries of the underlying chords.
36 Helmholtz (1863/1954), T erhardt 1974, Burns 1999, Sethares 1999, Cariani 2001, Tramo et al. 2005.

