# 22900. CHP: Corel VENTURA

**Authors:** Myers
**Year:** D:20

---

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/11617819
Spectral and Temporal Processing in Human Auditory Cortex
Article  in  Cerebral Cortex · March 2002
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/12.2.140 · Source: PubMed
CITATIONS

READS

6 authors, including: Deborah A Hall
Heriot-Watt University

## 290 PUBLICATIONS   12,684 CITATIONS

## SEE PROFILE

Ingrid Johnsrude
Western University

## 222 PUBLICATIONS   27,542 CITATIONS

## SEE PROFILE

Mark Haggard
University of Cambridge

## 145 PUBLICATIONS   5,407 CITATIONS

## SEE PROFILE

Michael Akeroyd
University of Nottingham

## 138 PUBLICATIONS   5,704 CITATIONS

## SEE PROFILE

All content following this page was uploaded by Ingrid Johnsrude on 18 March 2014. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file. We used positron emission tomography to examine the response of
human auditory cortex to spectral and temporal variation. Volunteers
listened to sequences derived from a standard stimulus, consisting
of two pure tones separated by one octave alternating with a random
duty cycle. In one series of five scans, spectral information (tone
spacing) remained constant while speed of alternation was doubled
at each level. In another five scans, speed was kept constant while
the number of tones sampled within the octave was doubled at each
level, resulting in increasingly fine frequency differences. Results
indicated that (i) the core auditory cortex in both hemispheres
responded to temporal variation, while the anterior superior
temporal areas bilaterally responded to the spectral variation; and
(ii) responses to the temporal features were weighted towards
the left, while responses to the spectral features were weighted
towards the right. These findings confirm the specialization of the
left-hemisphere auditory cortex for rapid temporal processing, and
indicate that core areas are especially involved in these processes. The results also indicate a complementary hemispheric specializa-
tion in right-hemisphere belt cortical areas for spectral processing. The data provide a unifying framework to explain hemispheric
asymmetries in processing speech and tonal patterns. We propose
that differences exist in the temporal and spectral resolution of
corresponding fields in the two hemispheres, and that they may be
related to anatomical hemispheric asymmetries in myelination and
spacing of cortical columns. Inroduction
A salient aspect of hemispheric specialization in the human
brain pertains to the processing of auditory speech signals. Much evidence exists indicating that speech sounds are prefer-
entially processed within left auditory cortical areas. Classic
observations of aphasic patients have pointed to the importance
of left posterior temporal cortex in speech comprehension,
and more recent evidence from neuroimaging also indicates
recruitment of left temporal and frontal cortical regions for
the analysis of speech information [see Zatorre and Binder for
review (Zatorre and Binder, 2000)]. However, the basis for this
specialization remains unclear. One relevant set of findings that is often overlooked in
examining the specialization of speech relates to evidence for
specialization of pitch processing. Lesions to right but not left
primary auditory cortical areas, for example, specifically impair
the perception of missing fundamental pitch (Zatorre, 1988),
and direction of pitch change (Johnsrude et al., 2000); more
generally, damage to the superior temporal cortex on the right
also affects a variety of other tonal or spectral processing tasks
(Milner, 1962; Zatorre, 1985; Sidtis and Volpe, 1988; Divenyi
and Robinson, 1989; Robin et al., 1990; Zatorre and Samson,
1991; Zatorre and Halpern, 1993). Also, considerable functional
imaging evidence is consistent with a greater role for right
auditory cortices in tonal pitch perception (Zatorre et al., 1994; Binder et al., 1997; Griffiths et al., 1999; Halpern and Zatorre,
1999; Hugdahl et al., 1999; Perry et al., 1999). The complementary specializations for speech and tonal
materials revealed by this literature suggest a hypothesis to
explain the functional hemispheric differences. Whereas the
analysis of speech requires good temporal resolution (Tallal et
al., 1993) to process rapidly changing energy peaks (formants)
that are characteristic of many speech consonants, it can be
argued that tonal processes instead require good frequency
resolution. The hypothesis we wish to test is that human
auditory cortex is functionally segregated, such that different
fields are selectively sensitive to temporal or spectral acoustic
features, and that differences exist in the temporal and spectral
resolving power between corresponding cortical fields in the
two hemispheres. Considerable evidence already exists that cortical specializa-
tion for speech may be related to rapid auditory processing. For example, deficits in temporal processing in the tens of milli-
seconds range have been demonstrated in a variety of language
disorders (Efron, 1963; Tallal and Newcombe, 1978; Phillips and
Farmer, 1990; Fitch et al., 1997). Recent brain imaging data also
indicate better temporal resolution for the left auditory cortex
(Belin et al., 1998). It has also been shown that behaviorally,
speech recognition can be accomplished with primarily tem-
poral cues (Shannon et al., 1995). What is not yet known is
whether distinct cortical fields are primarily responsive to
temporal as opposed to spectral sound features, and whether
their response properties differ in the two hemispheres. The
present investigation was carried out to examine this question
directly using functional imaging. We constructed nonverbal
stimuli that varied independently and systematically along
spectral and temporal dimensions. We predicted that increasing
the rate of temporal change would preferentially recruit left
auditory cortical areas, while increasing the number of spectral
elements would engage right auditory cortical regions more
strongly. Materials and Methods
Subjects
Twelve healthy, right-handed volunteers (half of each sex) with normal
hearing participated in the experiment after giving informed consent. Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of pure-tone patterns in which the frequency and
duration of the individual elements were varied systematically. At each
frequency transition, tones were ramped on and off in counterphase
using a cosine function with a 10 ms duration, thus maintaining a nearly
constant total amplitude envelope and avoiding transients (Fig. 1a). Two
stimulus parameters — rate of frequency modulation and spectral distribu-
tion of elements within the pattern — were varied independently in the
two conditions of the experiment, while keeping the frequency range and
amplitude constant at all times. The parametric changes in the two dimen-
Spectral and Temporal Processing in
Human Auditory Cortex
Robert J. Zatorre and Pascal Belin
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, 3801
University St., Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada
Cerebral Cortex Oct 2001;11:946–953; 1047–3211/01/$4.00
© Oxford University Press 2001. All rights reserved.

sions were applied starting with the same standard stimulus condition,
consisting of two tones separated by one octave with a relatively slow rate
of alternation (see Fig. 1b). This standard condition was then subjected
to five levels of temporal variation and five levels of spectral variation, for
a total of 11 scans. Throughout a given scan the parameters were held
constant, so that variation in the desired parameter occurred only across
scans. In the temporal condition, the frequencies used were fixed at 500 and

### 1000 Hz, thus keeping a constant separation of one octave. The rate of

alternation of these two frequencies was varied from relatively slower to
relatively faster across each of five different scans, doubling the speed
with each successive condition. In order to avoid spectral changes that
would emerge if a constant rate of alternation were used, the stimuli were
generated using a randomly determined duty cycle, sampled from a distri-
bution with the following characteristics: if the shortest duration used for
a given condition is t, then the range of durations sampled varied from t
to nt, where n is an integer, and the probability of occurrence of any
given duration is ½n. Thus, the duration with the highest probability of
occurrence (½1 = 0.50) will be t, the shortest one for a given condition;
the next longer tone would have a duration of 2t, and would occur with a
probability of ½2 = 0.25; the duration 3t would occur with a probability
0.125, and so forth. These stimulus sequences are illustrated in Figure 1b (left side). In
each of the five scanning conditions, the value of the parameter t varies
from the slowest, at 667 ms (the standard stimulus), to the next faster
with t = 333 ms, and so forth to the fastest condition, where t = 21 ms. The latter value corresponds to the fastest range of temporal change
most relevant for speech analysis (Phillips and Farmer, 1990; Tallal et al.,
1993). The figure also illustrates Fourier spectra of these sequences,
showing that there is essentially no change in spectral distribution across
conditions, apart from some minimal spread of energy for the fastest
(t = 21) condition. The spectral peaks corresponding to the two tones
remain fixed, and what differences do exist are on the order of 20 dB
below these peaks. Thus, the random duty cycle manipulation success-
fully avoids major artifacts in the spectral domain arising from the change
in rate of presentation. The stimuli for the second set of five scans (Fig. 1b, right side), termed
the spectral condition, consisted of a sequence of tones sampled from
between 500 and 1000 Hz, and presented according to the same random
duty-cycle parameters as described above, using a fixed value of t = 667
ms. The frequency differences between tones were varied parametrically
from coarsest to finest within each of the five scans, using frequency
separations of half of an octave, one-quarter of an octave, one-eighth of an
octave, etc., or 600, 300, 150, 75 and 37.5 cents (where 1 cent is a unit of
equal log frequency separation; 1 octave = 1200 cents). Thus, starting
with the standard condition, the stimuli consist simply of the same two
tones one octave apart as described above. The next condition ( f = 600)
divides the octave range into two logarithmically, so that frequencies are
selected at random between 500, 707 and 1000 Hz; for the next condition
( f = 300) the octave is divided into four (500, 594, 707, 841 and 1000 Hz),
and so on to the final condition ( f = 37.5) in which the frequency separ-
ations are smallest, at 1/32 of an octave. The change across conditions is
thus related to the fact that the number of different frequencies sampled
within any given frequency band, integrated over some time window,
increases as a function of the spectral parameter. Note that in the spectral conditions, only the distribution of spectral
elements (i.e. number of frequencies) varies across scans, with no change
in rate of presentation, whereas in the temporal conditions the converse
is true: only the rate is varied and the spectral difference is kept constant
at one octave. Fourier spectra of the spectral condition (Fig. 1b) illustrate
the increasingly fine frequency components present in the spectrum
across conditions. (Audio examples of these stimuli are available at the
following internet site: www.zlab.mcgill.ca)
Procedure
Stimuli were presented binaurally over insert earphones at an intensity
of between 73 and 78 dB SPL. The order of presentation of all conditions
was counterbalanced across subjects according to a Latin square design. Subjects were familiarized with the appropriate stimulus sequence prior
to each scan; they were then instructed to listen carefully to the con-
tinuous stimulus sequence with their eyes closed but not to perform any
explicit task. Stimulation was started several seconds before scanning
began, and continued uninterrupted for the 60 s of scanning. In addition,
a silent baseline condition, in which no stimulation was presented, was
interspersed with the others. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Scanning
PET scans were obtained with a Siemens Exact HR+ tomograph operating
in three-dimensional acquisition mode. The distribution of cerebral blood
flow (CBF) was measured during each 60 s scan using the H2O15 water
bolus method (Raichle et al., 1983). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
scans (160 1-mm-thick slices) were also obtained for each subject with a
1.5 T Phillips ACS system to provide anatomical detail. CBF images were
Figure 1. (a) Detail of transition between frequencies used in all stimulus sequences. The top graph shows how the amplitude profile of each tone was ramped in cosine
counterphase; the bottom graph shows the resulting waveform. Note the smooth
change of frequency, devoid of discontinuities or any variation in amplitude envelope at
the transition point. (b) Schematic representation of stimuli used. Each pair of panels
shows an excerpt of a stimulus sequence represented on the left as a spectrogram
(frequency as a function of time) and on the right as a Fourier spectrum (amplitude as a
function of frequency; integrated over a 10 s time window). The top pair of panels
represents the standard stimulus: two tones with a frequency separation f of 1200
cents (one octave), with a fastest temporal change of t = 667 ms. The three sets of
panels along the left of the figure illustrate three levels of change on the temporal
parameter, such that t = 333, 83 or 21 ms, the latter corresponding to the fastest value
used, while f is held constant. The spectrogram shows how the stimuli change
progressively faster, while the Fourier spectra show two fixed spectral peaks
corresponding to the two frequencies, with only a minimal spread of energy as the rate
of alternation is increased. The three sets of panels along the right side of the figure
illustrate three levels of change on the spectral parameter, with the minimum frequency
difference f decreasing to 600, 150 and 37.5 cents. The value of t is held constant at 667
ms. Note that the Fourier spectra show increasing numbers of more finely spaced
frequency components as the spectral parameter changes. Cerebral Cortex Oct 2001, V 11 N 10 947

reconstructed using a 14 mm Hanning filter, normalized for differences in
global CBF and co-registered with the individual MRI data (Evans et al.,
1992). Each matched MRI/PET data set was then linearly resampled into
the standardized Talairach and Tournoux stereotaxic coordinate system
(Talairach and Tournoux, 1988) via an automated feature-matching
algorithm (Collins et al., 1994). Statistical Analysis of CBF Changes
Regression maps (Paus et al., 1996) were calculated to assess the
significance of the relationship between each input parameter (spectral
and temporal variation) and CBF (i.e. their linear regression). The data set
for this analysis consisted of normalized CBF values obtained in each
subject during each of the six conditions (standard plus five levels of
parametric variation), yielding a total of 72 image volumes. The effect of
the variation in spectral or temporal parameter was assessed by means of
analysis of covariance, with subjects as a main effect and the parameter
number as a covariate. The following model was fitted: E(yij) = ai + βPsij
where yij is the normalized CBF of subject i on scan j, and sij is the
parameter value at scan j. The subject effect (ai) is removed and the
parameter of interest is the slope βP of the effect of the parametric change
on CBF. In addition to the covariation analysis, a categorical comparison was
also performed, contrasting the spectral conditions to the temporal
conditions directly. For this analysis the CBF values corresponding to the
five conditions in which spectral variation occurred were averaged, and
this volume was compared with the average of the five conditions in
which temporal variation occurred. The resulting volume was searched
for regions of significant CBF change. Differences reflect areas whose
CBF response is greater to stimuli varying in one parameter than the
other, and vice versa. The significance of focal CBF changes for both types of analysis was
assessed by a method based on three-dimensional Gaussian random-field
theory (Worsley et al., 1992), which corrects for the multiple com-
parisons involved in searching across a volume. Because we wished to test
hypotheses concerning the temporal neocortex, we restricted the search
volume a priori, which allows the use of a lower threshold value and
hence greater sensitivity within this region. Values equal to or exceeding
a criterion of t = 3.2 were considered significant (P < 0.01, two-tailed),
yielding a false-positive rate of 0.52 in 60 resolution elements (each of
which has dimensions 14 × 14 × 14 mm), if the volume of temporal cortex
gray matter is roughly 170 cm3. Results
PET data were analyzed using a two-step approach. First, the
image volumes were searched for CBF changes in the superior
temporal region that covaried significantly as a function of
the two input parameters (temporal and spectral) in order to
identify the location of significant CBF change in temporal
cortices. The response within these regions was extracted by
computing the CBF value relative to the silent baseline condition
in a spherical region of interest (radius 5 mm) centered on the
coordinates from the covariation analysis. These CBF values were
then used to compute slopes as a function of each parameter, in
order to test for the predicted hemispheric differences. Secondly,
as an additional way to examine hemispheric asymmetries,
the direct comparison of spectral to temporal conditions was
analyzed via subtraction of these conditions from one another,
and region of interest analyses were also conducted on the
resulting CBF values. Covariation Analyses
The analysis of covariation for the temporal parameter revealed
only two regions of significant CBF covariation (Fig. 2; Table 1);
these foci were located in the left and right Heschl’s gyri (HG), as
determined from inspection of the average anatomical MRIs, and
by comparison to anatomical probabilistic maps (Penhune et al.,
1996). Analysis of covariation for the spectral parameter
revealed three regions located within the superior temporal gyri
(Fig. 2; Table 1): two roughly symmetrically located in a region of
the STG anterior to HG in each hemisphere, and a third in a
region in the upper bank of the right superior temporal sulcus
(STS), posterior to HG, which was not matched by a symmetrical
area on the left (Fig. 2). The CBF data extracted from the regions of interest located in
HG and anterior STG areas in each hemisphere (Table 1) were
used to compute slopes (CBF as a function of parameter) for
each individual subject for each condition using a least-squares
regression method. These slopes were entered as dependent
variables into analyses of variance, with side and stimulus con-
dition as the two factors. The analysis for HG indicated a highly
significant main effect of stimulus condition [F(1,11) = 27.0, P < 0.001], indicating that the slope for the temporal parameter
was much greater than for the spectral parameter, as expected
from the covariation analysis. There was no interaction with
side, however. A similar analysis for the anterior STG regions
showed a clear interaction between side and stimulus condition
[F(1,11) = 11.92, P < 0.005]. Inspection of the slopes derived
from these CBF values (Fig. 3) indicates that the predicted
pattern was present: the slope is higher for the temporal than
for the spectral parameter in the left hemisphere, but higher for
Table 1
Covariation analysis
Parameter
Region
x
y
z
t
Temporal
left HG
–47
–18

6.14
right HG

–11

5.61
Spectral
left STG anterior
–51
–13

3.24
right STG anterior

–2
3.50
right STS

–37

3.30
Abbreviations: HG: Heschl’s gyrus; STG: superior temporal gyrus; STS: superior temporal sulcus. Figure 2. (Top panel) Three-dimensional rendering of the CBF data from the covariation analyses onto a magnetic resonance image of a representative individual subject’s brain,
viewed from the right. The level of the section (z = 3mm) is indicated in the inset. The green areas correspond to the regions showing significant covariation of CBF with increasing
rate of temporal change, while the red areas correspond to regions whose CBF increased as a function of change in the spectral parameter (precise stereotaxic coordinates are given
in Table 1). H indicates the stem of Heschl’s gyrus in each hemisphere; STS indicates the superior temporal sulcus. Note that the temporal covariation sites are located within Heschl’s
gyri in the two hemispheres, while the spectral covariations are located anterior to the sites covarying with the temporal stimulus parameter. An additional posterior site of spectral
covariation is located within the STS in the right hemisphere only. Figure 4. (Bottom panel) Merged PET and MRI volumes corresponding to the direct comparison of temporal and spectral conditions to one another (corresponding to subtraction
analysis in Table 2). The image on the left shows a horizontal section taken through the region of Heschl’s gyri (z = 9), which showed significantly greater activity in the combined
temporal conditions than in the combined spectral conditions. The section on the right is taken through the maxima corresponding to the anterior superior temporal region (z = –6),
which showed a greater response to the spectral conditions than to the temporal conditions. The bar graphs illustrate the percent difference between condition in regions of interest
taken from corresponding locations.

### 948 Spectral and Temporal Auditory Processing • Zatorre and Belin

Cerebral Cortex Oct 2001, V 11 N 10 949

the spectral than for the temporal parameter in the right; the
right STS region shows a significant slope only for the spectral
parameter, with no change as a function of temporal variation. Subtraction Analysis
The analysis contrasting all temporal conditions to all spectral
conditions yielded increased CBF to the temporal condition
in two sites: left and right HG (Fig. 4; Table 2). The converse
comparison (higher CBF to spectral than temporal conditions)
yielded two sites in the left and right anterior STG (Fig. 4; Table
2). The stereotaxic locations of these areas were similar to those
observed in the covariation analysis (vector distance between
corresponding points in left and right HG were 1 and 16 mm,
respectively; for the STG region the distances were 9 and
21 mm). Regions of interest placed on each of these locations yielded
the average CBF differences illustrated in the bar graphs shown
in Figure 4. To evaluate the presence of significant hemispheric
differences across these two parameters, we computed an index
of asymmetry for each pair of regions that took into account the
predicted direction of the effect (right minus left for the anterior
STG, since the spectral changes were predicted to be greater
on the right, and left minus right for the HG region since the
temporal changes were predicted to be greater on the left). The
difference between these two indices was significant [t(11) =
2.39, P < 0.02], confirming the conclusion drawn from the
covariation analysis that the two pairs of regions have opposite
hemispheric weightings. Discussion
The analyses revealed two main patterns of results. First, distinct
subareas of auditory cortex in both hemispheres respond to
temporal as opposed to spectral change: the region of HG was
preferentially recruited by progressively increasing temporal
variation, whereas anterior STG areas and a right STS region
covaried significantly with the spectral parameter (Fig. 2). Secondly, in keeping with the predictions, the left anterior STG
region showed a higher slope to the temporal as compared with
the spectral parameter, whereas the converse was observed for
the right anterior STG and right STS regions (Fig. 3). Both sets
of findings were largely confirmed by the direct comparison of
spectral to temporal conditions: temporal changes recruit HG in
both hemispheres, but with greater response on the left, while
spectral changes recruit anterior STG regions bilaterally, with
a greater response on the right (Fig. 4). The similarity across
analyses is important since each analysis makes different assump-
tions concerning the nature of the response to the parametric
variation. To the extent that both sets of results converge on
similar conclusions, one may conclude with greater confidence
that the observed effects reflect systematic differences in the
pattern of response. Core versus Belt Areas
The finding that primary auditory regions (core areas) in both
hemispheres preferentially respond to acoustic temporal feat-
ures, whereas more anterior STG regions (belt or parabelt areas)
respond preferentially to spectral features fits with recent views
about the hierarchical arrangement of primate auditory cortex
(Kaas et al., 1999). One consistent finding is that pure tone
responses are generally best observed in core regions, whereas
lateral belt areas have more complex response properties and are
often sensitive to stimuli with wider bandwidths (Rauschecker
et al., 1995; Rauschecker, 1998). Since belt areas receive projec-
tions from the core areas, and hence integrate inputs from more
narrowly tuned core units, one might expect the spectral set of
stimuli to recruit belt over core areas (Rauschecker et al., 1997)
because they involve complex spectral changes over time, and
this was indeed what we observed. However, spectral inte-
gration is usually understood in terms of multiple frequencies
present simultaneously. In the present study, since only a single
frequency was presented at any one time, the effect we observed
most likely reflects the integration of different frequencies over
time, and may therefore be tied to interactions between units
tuned to different frequency bands (Brosch et al., 1999). Figure 3. Slopes of CBF changes in three selected cortical regions as a function of
spectral and temporal input parameters. Symbols indicate average CBF with one
standard error of the mean; lines are drawn through the least-squares linear solution
corresponding to these points. Table 2
Subtraction analysis
Comparison
Region
x
y
z
t
Temporal–spectral
left HG
–47
–18

5.08
right HG

–23

3.43
Spectral–temporal
left STG anterior
–44

3.80
right STG anterior

–6
4.58
Abbreviations: HG: Heschl’s gyrus; STG: superior temporal gyrus.

### 950 Spectral and Temporal Auditory Processing • Zatorre and Belin

The observation that a region in the upper bank of the right
STS also responds to increasing spectral complexity fits with
recent fMRI findings that STS areas are sensitive to the acoustic
shape of human vocal sounds (Belin et al., 2000), since both
situations would require sensitivity to subtle changes in spectral
energy distribution. More generally, the finding that an STS
region responds to these sorts of stimuli is in agreement with the
proposal that these regions form part of a ventral stream special-
ized for object-feature processing, in which spectral information
would play an important role (Rauschecker, 1998). The high CBF
response to the temporally varying stimuli in the core area (HG)
in both hemispheres presumably reflects the high temporal
sensitivity of neurons in this region, but because the ampli-
tude envelope was constant (Fig. 1a), this sensitivity must be
specifically related to the temporal rate of frequency change,
independently of amplitude modulation. Hemispheric Differences
The findings relating to hemispheric differences support the
hypothesis that a relative tradeoff may exist between temporal
and spectral resolution of the two hemispheres. In a linear
system, temporal and spectral resolution are inversely related;
although the auditory nervous system is a nonlinear, distributed
system, and hence would be unlikely to show a direct reciprocal
relation, the differential hemispheric responses observed in the
present study may nevertheless reflect the auditory nervous
system’s adaptation to the presence of spectral and temporal
features in the acoustic environment. That is, maximizing the
processing of rapidly changing information (high temporal
resolution) might set an upper limit on frequency resolution;
this might explain why the changes in CBF observed within the
left anterior STG area were greater to the temporal than to the
spectral parameter. Conversely, higher frequency resolution
might entail a relative decrement in temporal processing, hence
the inverse pattern seen in the right anterior STG and STS
regions. Neurophysiological recordings in macaque monkeys have
shown that auditory cortical neurons are highly sensitive to
both spectral and temporal features of sounds (Phillips, 1993; Steinschneider et al., 1995; deCharms et al., 1998). Data from
several species indicate that core regions often have higher
frequency resolution than do belt areas, which may not fit with
the current data. However, Eggermont noted that in the AI and
AII fields of the cat there was an inverse relation between band-
width and temporal resolution (Eggermont, 1998), consistent
with our proposal. Existing single-unit data are insufficiently
certain about the response properties of cortical fields, particu-
larly outside the core, to allow prediction of their responses to
stimuli such as those used here; moreover, the relation between
blood flow measures and single-unit responses is complex. Further, homologies between monkey and human auditory cor-
tex have not been worked out, and it is not yet known whether
auditory cortical architecture in humans and other primates
differs qualitatively. Despite these uncertainties, the neuronal
functional properties derived from animal studies suggest that
the model proposed above is at least plausible, in terms of the
type of acoustic information to which neurons are sensitive. Another parallel with the animal literature is provided by
evidence that hemispheric differences also exist in several
species. For example, Fitch et al. found rate-dependent left-
hemisphere lateralization effects for rapidly changing tone
sequences in the rat (Fitch et al., 1993). Wetzel et al. report
right-hemisphere lateralization for processing frequency modula-
tion in the Mongolian gerbil (Wetzel et al., 1998). These findings
suggest that the laterality effects discussed in the present
paper may not be limited to the human nervous system; if
so, then perhaps they should best be characterized as precursors
to the development of speech and tonal processing, rather than
consequences thereof. The differential temporal and spectral processing capacities
in the auditory areas of the two hemispheres, and the hypothesis
that these arise from differences in spectral/temporal resolution,
help to explain a variety of previous results. The present findings
confirm and extend the idea that left auditory regions may be
specialized for rapid temporal processing (Tallal et al., 1993),
but additionally they provide a unifying framework to account
for the complementary specialization of the right auditory
cortex. The hypothesis is consistent with prior studies which
have shown that damage to left auditory cortical areas often
results in deficits in temporal processing that are manifested as
speech disorders (Efron, 1963; Phillips and Farmer, 1990; Tallal
et al., 1993). The hypothesis is also supported by functional
imaging data that indicate left auditory cortex advantages for
processing rapidly changing formant transitions in speech or
pseudospeech syllables (Fiez et al., 1995; Belin et al., 1998). Additional evidence specifically indicating that left auditory
cortical units have higher temporal resolution comes from
recent electrophysiological recordings (Liégeois-Chauvel et al.,
1999) showing that responses within left HG encode the voice-
onset time of a consonant, whereas the right HG did not show
sensitivity to this temporal parameter. Even more striking, Liégeois-Chauvel
et
al. (2001) showed that intracortically
recorded auditory evoked potentials were more sharply tuned to
frequency in the right auditory cortex than in the left, consistent
with the pattern observed in the present study. The hypothesis proposed in this paper also helps to clarify
findings of impaired pitch and spectral processing after lesions
of right auditory cortical areas, as well as brain imaging evidence
in a wide variety of tonal processing tasks. The findings of
Johnsrude et al. (Johnsrude et al., 2000) are particularly relevant
in this respect: they found that lesions encroaching onto the
right (but not left) HG resulted in a specific deficit for judging
direction of pitch change. Notably, this impairment did not
preclude most patients from completing the task, but raised their
threshold by a factor of four. Such a finding can be explained if
spectral resolution underlies hemispheric differences: damage
to the right auditory cortex would disrupt the finer-grained
mechanism but would leave intact the left auditory cortical
areas which presumably have coarser resolution, hence leading
to increased thresholds but not a complete inability to discrim-
inate. The findings of Robin et al. (Robin et al., 1990) are also
relevant, as they too found that damage to association cortices
in the right hemisphere resulted in spectral but not temporal
processing deficits, while the converse was observed after
left-hemisphere damage. Conversely, aspects of tonal processing
that depend on small temporal differences, such as discrimin-
ation of the temporal microstructure of familiar tunes, are more
affected by damage to the left than to the right temporal lobe
(Samson et al., 2001). Anatomical Considerations
If the hypothesis suggested here is valid, the question arises as
to how it is implemented in the auditory cortex. A variety of
findings of anatomical and structural asymmetries in human
auditory cortices are relevant to this question. In-vivo volumetric
measures of HG from MRI scanning have shown a greater volume
of white matter underlying the left HG as compared with the
right, which could be a consequence of a greater number or
Cerebral Cortex Oct 2001, V 11 N 10 951

denser myelination of fibers into the primary auditory cortex
(Penhune et al., 1996). The latter interpretation is supported
by post-mortem tissue analysis of the posterior temporal lobe
(Anderson et al., 1999), which confirmed a greater volumer of
white-matter tissue on the left than on the right, and showed that
this was due to greater myelin sheath thickness on the left. In
addition, Seldon (Seldon, 1981) reported that cortical columns in
the left auditory cortex were more widely spaced than those on
the right, and Galuske et al. (Galuske et al., 2000) found wider
spacing of intrinsic connections on the left. In addition, Hutsler
and Gazzaniga (Hutsler and Gazzaniga, 1996) reported larger left
than right layer IV pyramidal cells in the human auditory cortex. The foregoing anatomical differences are consistent with the
model proposed here in that greater myelination on the left
would allow for faster conduction, thereby leading to greater
sensitivity to rapid acoustic changes. At the same time, one may
speculate that the wider spacing of cortical columns and greater
intrinsic connections on the left would allow integration over
larger tonotopically organized areas, thereby leading to poorer
spectral resolution. The converse arguments apply to the right
auditory cortices, since the structural features would appear to
favor higher frequency resolution but slower transmission. Thus,
these microstructural anatomical differences between the two
hemispheres might provide the neural substrate for the func-
tional differences in spectral/temporal resolution observed in
the present study (Klingberg et al., 2000). The present model thus suggests that relatively subtle
quantitative differences in neural response properties, present
early in the cortical processing stream, may lead to qualitatively
distinct functional roles for higher-order processes. The organ-
ization of intra-hemispheric local circuits (Ringo et al., 1994)
might be sensitive to these initial processing advantages and
could lead to more general functional specialization within the
hemisphere. The left hemisphere’s predominant role in many
complex linguistic functions may thus be tied to a slight initial
advantage in decoding speech sounds. We speculate that the
important role of the right hemisphere in many, though not
necessarily all, aspects of musical perception [cf. Peretz et al.
(Peretz et al., 1994)], might then conceivably have arisen as a
consequence of this specialization. Notes
We thank B. Pike and A. C. Evans for access to the McConnell Brain
Imaging Centre, and its personnel for their assistance; P. Ahad and
M. Bouffard for technical expertise; and W. Serniclaes for helpful
discussion. Supported by grants MT11541 and GR13972 from the
Canadian Institute for Health Research and an award from the McDonnell-
Pew Cognitive Neuroscience Program to the first author, and by
fellowships from France-Télécom and INSERM-FRSQ to the second author. Address correspondence to Robert J. Zatorre, Montreal Neurological
Institute, 3801 University St., Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, Canada. Email:
robert.zatorre@mcgill.ca. References
Anderson B, Southern BD, Powers RE (1999) Anatomic asymmetries
of the posterior superior temporal lobes: a postmortem study. Neuropsychiat Neuropsychol Behav Neurol 12:247–254. Belin P, Zilbovicius M, Crozier S, Thivard L, Fontaine A, Masure M-C, Samson Y (1998) Lateralization of speech and auditory temporal
processing. J Cogn Neurosci 10:536–540. Belin P, Zatorre RJ, Lafaille P, Ahad P, Pike B (2000) Voice-selective areas
in human auditory cortex. Nature 403:309–312. Binder J, Frost J, Hammeke T, Cox R, Rao S, Prieto T (1997) Human brain
language areas identified by functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 17:353–362. Brosch M, Schulz A, Scheich H (1999) Processing of sound sequences
in macaque auditory cortex: response enhancement. J Neurophysiol
82:1542–1559. Collins D, Neelin P, Peters T, Evans A (1994) Automatic 3D intersubject
registration of MR volumetric data in standardized Talairach space. J Comput Assist Tomogr 18:192–205.
deCharms R, Blake D, Merzenich M (1998) Optimizing sound features to
cortical neurons. Science 280:1439–1443. Divenyi P, Robinson A (1989) Nonlinguistic auditory capabilities in
aphasia. Brain Lang 37:290–326. Efron R (1963) Temporal perception, aphasia and déjá vu. Brain 86:
403–423. Eggermont JJ (1998) Representation of spectral and temporal sound
features in three cortical fields of the cat. Similarities outweigh
differences. J Neurophysiol 80:2743–2764. Evans A, Marrett S, Neelin P, Collins L, Worsley K, Dai W, Milot S, Meyer E, Bub D (1992) Anatomical mapping of functional activation
in stereotactic coordinate space. NeuroImage 1:43–53. Fiez JA, Tallal P, Raichle ME, Miezin FM, Katz WF, Petersen SE (1995) PET
studies of auditory and phonological processing: effects of stimulus
characteristics and task demands. J Cogn Neurosci 7:357–375. Fitch H, Brown C, O’Connor K, Tallal P (1993) Functional lateralization
for auditory temporal processing in male and female rats. Behav
Neurosci 107:844–850. Fitch RH, Miller S, Tallal P (1997) Neurobiology of speech perception. Annu Rev Neurosci 20:331–354. Galuske RAW, Schlote W, Bratzke H, Singer W (2000) Interhemispheric
asymmetries of the modular structure in human temporal cortex. Science 289:1946–1949. Griffiths TD, Johnsrude IS, Dean JL, Green GGR (1999). A common neural
substrate for the analysis of pitch and duration pattern in segmented
sound? NeuroReport 10:3825–3830. Halpern AR, Zatorre RJ (1999) When that tune runs through your head:
a PET investigation of auditory imagery for familiar melodies. Cereb
Cortex 9:697–704. Hugdahl K, Bronnick K, Kyllingsbaek S, Law I, Gade A, Paulson OB (1999)
Brain activation during dichotic presentations of consonant–vowel
and musical instrument stimuli: a 15O-PET study. Neuropsychologia
37:431–440. Hutsler J, Gazzaniga M (1996) Acetylcholinesterase staining in human
auditory and language cortices: regional variation of structural
features. Cereb Cortex 6:260–270. Johnsrude IJ, Penhune VB, Zatorre RJ (2000) Functional specificity in
right human auditory cortex for perceiving pitch direction. Brain
123:155–163. Kaas JH, Hackett TA, Tramo MJ (1999) Auditory processing in primate
cerebral cortex. Curr Opin Neurobiol 9:164–170. Klingberg T, Hedehus M, Temple E, Salz T, Gabrieli JDE, Moseley ME, Poldrack RA (2000) Microstructure of temporo-parietal white matter
as a basis for reading ability: evidence from diffusion tensor magnetic
resonance imaging. Neuron 25:493–500. Liégeois-Chauvel C, de Graaf JB, Laguitton V, Chauvel P (1999)
Specialization of left auditory cortex for speech perception in man
depends on temporal coding. Cereb Cortex 9:484–496. Liégeois-Chauvel C, Giraud K, Badier J-M, Marquis P, Chauvel P (2001)
Intracerebral evoked potentials in pitch perception reveal a functional
asymmetry of human auditory cortex. Ann NY Acad Sci 930:117–132. Milner BA (1962) Laterality effects in audition. In Interhemispheric
relations and cerebral dominance (Mountcastle V, ed.), pp. 177–195. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Paus T, Perry DW, Zatorre RJ, Worsley K, Evans AC (1996) Modulation of
cerebral blood-flow in the human auditory cortex during speech: role
of motor-to-sensory discharges. Eur J Neurosci 8:2236–2246. Penhune VB, Zatorre RJ, MacDonald JD, Evans AC (1996) Interhemi-
spheric anatomical differences in human primary auditory cortex:
probabilistic mapping and volume measurement from magnetic
resonance scans. Cereb Cortex 6:661–672. Peretz I, Kolinsky R, Tramo M, Labrecque R, Hublet C, Demeurisse G, Belleville S (1994) Functional dissociations following bilateral lesions
of auditory cortex. Brain 117:1283–1301. Perry DW, Zatorre RJ, Petrides M, Alivisatos B, Meyer E, Evans AC (1999)
Localization of cerebral activity during simple singing. NeuroReport
10:3979–3984. Phillips DP (1993) Representation of acoustic events in the primary
auditory cortex. J Exp Psychol: Hum Percept Perform 19:203–216. Phillips DP, Farmer ME (1990) Acquired word deafness and the temporal

### 952 Spectral and Temporal Auditory Processing • Zatorre and Belin

grain of sound representation in the primary auditory cortex. Behav
Brain Res 40:84–90. Raichle M, Martin W, Herscovitch P, Mintun M, Markham J (1983) Brain
blood flow measured with intravenous O15 H2O. 1. Theory and error
analysis. J Nucl Med 24:790–798. Rauschecker JP (1998) Parallel processing in the auditory cortex of
primates. Audiol Neuro-Otol 3:86–103. Rauschecker JP, Tian B, Hauser M (1995) Processing of complex sounds in
the macaque nonprimary auditory cortex. Science 268:111–114. Rauschecker JP, Tian B, Pons T, Mishkin M (1997) Serial and parallel
processing in rhesus monkey auditory cortex. J Comp Neurol
382:89–103. Ringo JL, Doty RW, Demeter S, Simard PY (1994) Time is of the essence:
a conjecture that hemispheric specialization arises from interhemi-
spheric conduction delay. Cereb Cortex 4:331–343. Robin DA, Tranel D, Damasio H (1990) Auditory perception of temporal
and spectral events in patients with focal left and right cerebral
lesions. Brain Lang 39:539–555. Samson S, Ehrlé N, Baulac M (2001) Cerebral substrates for musical
temporal processes. Ann NY Acad Sci 930:166–178. Seldon H (1981) Structure of human auditory cortex, II. Axon
distributions and morphological correlates of speech perception. Brain Res 229: 295–310. Shannon R, Zeng F-G, Kamath V, Wygonski J, Ekelid M (1995) Speech
recognition with primarily temporal cues. Science 270:303–304. Sidtis JJ, Volpe BT (1988) Selective loss of complex-pitch or speech
discrimination after unilateral lesion. Brain Lang 34:235–245. Steinschneider M, Schroeder C, Arezzo J, Vaughan H (1995) Physiologic
correlates of the voice onset time boundary in primary auditory
cortex of the awake monkey: temporal response patterns. Brain Lang
48:326–340. Talairach J, Tournoux P (1988). Co-planar stereotaxic atlas of the human
brain. New York: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc. Tallal P, Newcombe F (1978) Impairment of auditory perception and
language comprehension in dysphasia. Brain Lang 5:13–24. Tallal P, Miller S, Fitch R (1993) Neurobiological basis of speech: a case for
the preeminence of temporal processing. Ann NY Acad Sci 682:
27–47. Wetzel W, Ohl F, Wagner T, Scheich H (1998) Right auditory cortex lesion
in Mongolian gerbils impairs discrimination of rising and falling
frequency-modulated tones. Neurosci Let 252:115–118. Worsley K, Evans A, Marrett S, Neelin P (1992) A three-dimensional
statistical analysis for CBF activation studies in human brain. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 12:900–918. Zatorre RJ (1985) Discrimination and recognition of tonal melodies after
unilateral cerebral excisions. Neuropsychologia 23:31–41. Zatorre RJ (1988) Pitch perception of complex tones and human
temporal-lobe function. J Acoust Soc Am 84:566–572. Zatorre RJ, Binder JR (2000) Functional and structural imaging of the
human auditory system. In Brain mapping: the systems (Toga A, Mazziota J, eds), pp. 365–402. Los Angeles, CA: Academic Press. Zatorre RJ, Halpern AR (1993) Effect of unilateral temporal-lobe excision
on perception and imagery of songs. Neuropsychologia 31:221–232. Zatorre RJ, Samson S (1991) Role of the right temporal neocortex in
retention of pitch in auditory short-term memory. Brain 114:
2403–2417. Zatorre RJ, Evans AC, Meyer E (1994) Neural mechanisms underlying
melodic perception and memory for pitch. J Neurosci 14:1908–1919. Cerebral Cortex Oct 2001, V 11 N 10 953
View publication stats
