# Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

**Year:** D:20

---

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105
DOI 10.1007/s00221-008-1286-z

## RESEARCH ARTICLE

Depth electrode recordings show double dissociation between
pitch processing in lateral Heschl’s gyrus and sound onset
processing in medial Heschl’s gyrus
Marc Schönwiesner · Robert J. Zatorre
Received: 17 October 2007 / Accepted: 13 January 2008 / Published online: 31 January 2008
© Springer-Verlag 2008
Abstract
Pitch is a fundamental perceptual attribute of
sounds. Our ability to discriminate, separate, and identify
sounds relies heavily on pitch. Recent neuroimaging studies
in humans have provided converging evidence for the exis-
tence of a “pitch center”—a region on the superior temporal
plane (STP) lateral to Heschl’s gyrus specialized in pitch
extraction—but a direct conWrmation is still missing. Intra-
cerebral recordings in humans are ideally suited for such a
conWrmation. Here we report results from depth electrode
recordings in a patient undergoing investigation for epi-
lepsy. We demonstrate a double dissociation between
responses from the medial and lateral STP around Heschl’s
gyrus to the onset of sound energy and the onset of pitch. Three pieces of evidence support this Wnding: (1) the
response to sounds that do not contain pitch is small in the
lateral STP compared to the medial STP; (2) sounds that
contain pitch evoke a strong response in the lateral STP; (3)
at the transition from noise to a specialised noise-like, but
tonal, sound referred to as iterated ripple noise, where the
onset of pitch is the sole acoustic event, only the lateral
contact showed a response. Our results provide direct evi-
dence for a pitch-speciWc area on lateral STP with intracra-
nial recordings from the human auditory cortex. Keywords
Pitch · Auditory cortex · Human ·
Auditory evoked potentials
Introduction
The perception of pitch is a fundamental function of the
auditory system. Pitch is the perceptual attribute that under-
lies the perception of melody in music and prosody and
speaker size in speech. Moreover, our ability to separate
and identify concurrent sounds from diVerent sources relies
heavily on pitch. For pure-tones, pitch is directly related to
frequency. For more complex sounds pitch has to be com-
puted in the auditory brain. One example is the perceptual
phenomenon of the missing fundamental, in which the
pitch of a complex harmonic tone is heard at the fundamen-
tal frequency (lowest frequency of the harmonic series)
even if that frequency itself is not present in the sound. Pat-
tern-recognition theories of pitch perception were proposed
to account for the missing fundamental phenomenon (Gold-
stein 1973). These theories assume that the pitch of a com-
plex tone is extracted by a centrally located processor that
measures frequency relationships between resolved spectral
components. Pattern-recognition theories explain the per-
ception of the missing fundamental, pitch percepts induced
by inharmonic complex tones, and the pitch ambiguity of
complex tones consisting of few harmonics. However,
these theories cannot account for pitch percepts elicited by
the periodicity of sounds in the absence of spectral cues. Licklider (1951) produced the Wrst computational model of
pitch perception based on time intervals within auditory
frequency channels. The signal is Wltered to simulate
cochlear frequency channels; then, a running autocorrela-
tion function is calculated in each channel to reveal any
periodicity. This model has since been extended to enable
quantitative predictions of pitch perception and it accounts
successfully for a large number of pitch phenomena
(Denham 2005; Meddis and O’Mard 1997, 2006; Wiegrebe
et al. 2000; Yost et al. 1996). While aspects of these models
M. Schönwiesner · R. J. Zatorre
Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research (BRAMS), Montreal, Canada
M. Schönwiesner (&) · R. J. Zatorre
Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Canada
e-mail: marc.schoenwiesner@mcgill.ca

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

have been tied to the physiology of the auditory periphery,
they do directly specify mechanisms of pitch representation
in the cerebral cortex. Several recent studies have addressed the question
whether there is an area in the cerebral cortex that is
specialized in the representation of pitch. Lesion studies
suggested a special role of lateral Heschl’s gyrus and
immediately surrounding parts of the superior temporal
plane (STP) it in the extraction of complex pitch (using
sounds with a missing harmonic fundamental, Zatorre
1988) and pitch direction discrimination (Johnsrude et al.
2000). A series of neuroimaging studies has also provided
evidence for the lateral Heschl’s gyrus to be speciWcally
involved the extraction of pitch (GriYths et al. 1998; Patt-
erson et al. 2002; Penagos et al. 2004). Activity in this area
was shown to be modulated by the salience and value of
pitch. Other studies have implicated this region in the inte-
gration of spectral information over time or frequency
channels (Hall et al. 2002; Schönwiesner et al. 2005; Zatorre and Belin 2001), a function that seems crucial for
computing the pitch of complex time-varying sounds. A
complementary piece of evidence comes from a neuro-
physiological study by Bendor and Wang (2005) in mar-
morset monkeys. They demonstrated that neurons in a
small region anterolateral to the medial primary Weld A1
represent the missing fundamental of harmonic stimuli. The
location of this area relative to other auditory Welds is simi-
lar to the location of the pitch sensitive region in the human
brain. The temporal characteristics of pitch-related responses
in the human auditory cortex have been studied with mag-
netoencephalography (MEG). These recordings have iso-
lated a transient component (“pitch onset response”, Krumbholz et al. 2003) and a sustained component (“sus-
tained pitch response”, Gutschalk et al. 2002, 2004) of the
auditory evoked Weld that indicate pitch processing. These
responses have larger latencies than typical responses to the
onset of a sound, indicating a hierarchical process in which
pitch extraction follows sound onset-related processing, or
a longer computation time for pitch extraction. Using
dipole modelling, the sources of these responses were iden-
tiWed on lateral Heschl’s gyrus, matching the results of the
functional imaging studies. This convergence of neuroim-
aging and MEG data provides strong evidence for pitch
processing in lateral Heschl’s gyrus, but a direct conWrma-
tion is still missing. Intracerebral recordings in humans are
ideally suited for such a conWrmation, because this tech-
nique has high temporal and spatial resolution, making it
possible to locate the cerebral sources of pitch-related
responses and relate their temporal characteristics to previ-
ous MEG results. Krumbholz and colleagues (2003) developed a continu-
ous stimulation paradigm, which separates pitch-speciWc
responses from the responses to the onset of sound energy. They used a specialized stimulus, referred to as iterated
ripple noise (IRN, Patterson et al. 1996, 2002; Yost,
1996a, b), the pitch and pitch strength of which can be var-
ied without introducing any major spectral changes. The
IRN was preceded by a portion of noise without pitch so
that the transient response evoked by the sound onset had
subsided before the pitch onset. It was thus possible to
temporally isolate pitch-related responses from other
processes. Here we use the continuous stimulation paradigm as well
as click and pure-tone stimulation with intracranial record-
ings from a patient’s auditory cortex to provide direct evi-
dence for a specialised role of lateral Heschl’s gyrus in
pitch processing. In particular, we show a double dissocia-
tion of sound onset responses in medial Heschl’s gyrus and
planum temporale and pitch-speciWc responses in lateral
Heschl’s gyrus and superior temporal gyrus. Materials and methods
Patient
A 33-year-old male patient with medically refractory focal
seizures undergoing investigation for epilepsy with intra-
cranial and depths electrodes gave written informed con-
sent to participate in this study. The patient’s left cerebral
hemisphere showed global atrophy without focal lesions or
cortical dysplasia. He showed cranio-facial hypertrophy on
the left and hemiconvulsion of the right hemibody. The
patient had had epileptic seizures from infancy, but his
family has no history of seizures or other neurological dis-
orders. He is left-handed, and a Wada test revealed right
hemisphere lateralization for speech processing. The
patient was Wrst implanted with frontal and temporal depth
electrodes and centroparietal epidural electrodes at age of

### 21. The examination indicated left temporal epilepsy. He

then underwent two surgical resections of epileptogenic
brain tissue, a transcortical selective amygdohippocampec-
tomy on the left at the age of 21, and, at the age of 24, an
extension of the resection to include the left anterior tempo-
ral lobe below the superior temporal gyrus back to the level
of the precentral sulcus (about 45 mm at the base of the
superior temporal gyrus), as well as hippocampal and para-
hippocampal tissue. Seizures returned about one year after
both surgeries and a third examination with epidural and
depth electrodes was performed. At this time the patient
agreed to participate in the present study, and sound-evoked
potentials were recorded from the implanted electrodes. The Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital Research
Ethics Committee approved the procedures used in this
study. Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

Stimuli
The patient was presented with a variety of sounds. Only
the stimulation with clicks, pure-tones, noise and IRN is
described here. The intensity of the stimulation was
adjusted to a comfortable hearing level of 65 dB SPL. The
patient Wrst listened passively to a series of 150 monaural
clicks, presented with 800 ms stimulus onset asynchrony. Then, sinusoids of 8 frequencies were played: 118, 200,
339, 574, 972, 1,646, 2,788, 4,723, and 8,000 Hz. The tones
were 100 ms long and were gated on and oV with 5 ms
cosine-squared ramps. The tones were presented 100 times
in pseudorandom order with a stimulus onset asynchrony of
800 ms. Finally, noise stimuli were played, consisting of
1 s of white noise followed by 500 ms of IRN. They were
presented 100 times in pseudorandom order with a stimulus
onset asynchrony of 2 s. The IRN was generated by delay-
ing a copy of a noise by 8 ms and adding it back onto itself
(“add-original” procedure, Yost et al. 1996). This process
was repeated 16 times, leading to a robust apparent pitch of

### 125 Hz. The stimuli were then high-pass Wltered at 500 Hz. Low-pitched IRN Wltered in this way eVectively excites all
frequency channels in the same way as random noise (Patt-
erson et al. 1996), thus making the onset of pitch the sole
acoustic event at the transition from noise to IRN. Both
portions were gated on and oV with 5 ms cosine-squared
ramps. The ramps overlapped at the transition, so that the
envelope of the composite stimulus remained Xat. Data acquisition
The implantation consisted of a combination of depth elec-
trodes and epidural electrodes according to the method of
Olivier and colleagues (1994). Electrodes were implanted
stereotactically using an image-guidance system (SSN
Neuronavigation System, Mississauga, ON, Canada)
through percutaneous twist drill holes in the skull. Intracranial depth electrodes were manufactured on site
by wrapping 76 m stainless steel wire around a 254 m
stainless steel central core. The wires were coated with
TeXon except for regions where the insulation was stripped
to form electrode contacts. In total, there were nine contacts
on each depth electrode that were spaced along the length
of the core wire at 5 mm intervals. The deepest contact
(contact 1) was made from the tip of the core wire and had
an uninsulated length of 1 mm, while more superWcial con-
tacts (contacts 2–9) were formed from stripped sections of
the marginal wire that was tightly wound to make 0.5 mm
long coils. The eVective surface area for each of the eight
superWcial contacts was 0.80 mm2, and was 0.85 mm2 for
the single deep contact. The depth electrode in the superior
temporal lobe, which was recorded from in the present
study, was directed within the lower bank of the Sylvian
Wssure about 5 mm posterior from Heschl’s gyrus, running
parallel to it for its whole length. Five of the nine electrode
contacts came to lie within brain tissue parallel and a few
millimeters posterior to Heschl’s gyrus (Fig. 1). The con-
tacts have low electrical impedance and are sensitive to the
local Weld potential within an area of about 10 mm radius. This estimate is based on experience with electrical stimu-
lations of single electrode contacts during the pre-surgery
procedure at the Montreal Neurological Institute. We veri-
Wed this estimate empirically by computing cross-correla-
tions of potential Xuctuations during rest before the start of
the experiment between all electrode contacts in all four
depth electrodes. Cross-correlation fell below signiWcance
threshold for any two contacts further than 10 mm apart. Three additional depth electrodes were placed, two
orthogonally through the middle and posterior medial
temporal gyrus, and one in the inferior parietal lobe. In
addition, four epidural electrodes were situated overlying
peri-sylvian and centro-parietal areas. Recordings were referenced to an extra-dural lead. The
EEG signal was band pass Wltered between 0.1 and 70 Hz
and digitally recorded with a sampling frequency of 200 Hz
using a 128-channel Harmony system for long-term moni-
toring (Stellate, Montreal, QC, Canada). The stimuli were played back at 48 kHz sampling fre-
quency from a personal computer running Presentation (Neu-
robehavioural Systems, Albany, CA, USA), and presented
via Etymotic ER2 insert earphones (Etymotic Research, Elk
Grove Village, IL, USA; the patient was unable to wear cir-
cum- or super-aural headphones due to head bandages). One
EEG channel was used to record trigger pulses sent by the
stimulation software at every stimulus onset. Data analysis
Data were read into Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) using the Stellate Signal File Interface toolbox
(Stellate, Montreal, QC, Canada) and analyzed with the
EEGLAB toolbox (Delorme and Makeig 2004). Data points
exceeding a max–min diVerence of 150 V were consid-
ered artefactual and a 500-ms window surrounding the arte-
fact was removed from subsequent analysis. The data were
bandpass-Wltered between 0.1 and 35 Hz. The data of
experiment 1 (pure-tone stimulation) were divided into
700-ms stimulus-locked epochs covering the period from
¡100 to 600 ms relative to stimulus onset. The data of
experiment 2 (IRN stimulation) were divided into 2,100-ms
stimulus-locked epochs covering the period from ¡100 to
2,000 ms relative to stimulus onset. The epochs for each
condition were averaged and baseline-corrected to the
100-ms period of silence just before stimulus onset. Statistics of the responses were computed using stan-
dard resampling procedures. The reliability of the average

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

event-related responses was estimated by computing
10,000 mean evoked responses generated by randomly
drawing with replacement from the measured single trials. The bootstrap standard error of the mean was then calcu-
lated as the standard deviation of the distribution of
resampled
means. SigniWcant
diVerences
between
responses from diVerent electrode contacts were found by
randomly exchanging single trials between electrode con-
tacts 10,000 times, each time calculating the new average
response at each contact and the diVerence between the
responses. If there is a signiWcant diVerence, then the
amplitude diVerence between the original responses will
fall outside 95% of the distribution of resampled ampli-
tude diVerences. Results
Sound evoked responses were recorded from all contacts of
the electrode in the superior temporal lobe, except the most
medial (contact 1), where response amplitudes were not
signiWcant compared to baseline Xuctuations (bootstrap
test). The waveform and magnitude of the responses
diVered between diVerent recording sites and stimuli. Click stimulation
Clicks evoked strong bipolar responses in the medial con-
tacts 2 and 3, and weaker responses in the lateral contacts 4
and 5 (Fig. 2b). The Wrst stable component of the responses
was a negative-going potential with amplitudes and laten-
cies at the diVerent sites from medial to lateral on the STP
as follows: contact 2 ¡52.2 V at 90 ms, contact 3
¡33.7 V at 115 ms, contact 4 ¡13 V at 105 ms, and con-
tact 5 ¡18.9 V at 105 ms. This wave was followed by a
positive-going potential with a peak latency of 235 ms,
clearest in the two lateral contacts, and a sustained positive
potential extending about 600 ms past stimulus oVset. Responses from contact 4 were small in amplitude com-
pared to the neighbouring contacts. Fig. 1 a Structural image of the patient’s brain, rotated into the axis of
the implanted electrode (see inset), with the section enlarged in b high-
lighted. b Trajectory of the electrode (black line) in the superior tem-
poral lobe. Of the Wve electrode contacts within grey or white matter,
four (white circles) showed signiWcant sound evoked responses (con-
tacts 2–5). Each contact is sensitive to the local Weld potential within a
10 mm radius, shown as black dotted circle for the medial (2) and the
lateral contact (5). c Schematic outline of skull, grey and white matter
with the electrode trace indicated (thick black line). The medial 2/3 of
HG, a conventional estimate of primary auditory cortex, are marked in
dark grey, the remaining lateral part of HG are marked in middle grey,
and the planum temporale is marked in light grey. d Parasagittal and
coronal slices through the location of the electrode contacts. The dotted
circles indicate the active radius around each contact, and the arrow
points to HG

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

Pure-tone stimulation
Responses at the medial contacts were strongly frequency
dependent, whereas the lateral contact 5 showed very simi-
lar responses to all frequencies (Fig. 3). Responses from
contact 4 were relatively small and inconsistent across fre-
quencies. Figure 4 shows the peak-to-peak (max–min)
amplitude within a time window from 50 to 200 ms past
stimulus onset as well as the latency of the Wrst negative
deXection for all 8 frequencies. In the two medial contacts,
response latencies decreased systematically from about
125 ms at 118 Hz to about 98 ms between 1 and 2.8 kHz. At 4.7 kHz response latency increased again to about
112 ms. At the lateral contact 5 there was a trend for the
response latency to increase with frequency from about
160 ms at 118 Hz to 180 ms at 4.7 kHz. Contact 2 responded strongest to the 972 Hz tone with
a systematic decrease of the response amplitude toward
lower and higher frequencies. The response preference
appears to shift slightly toward lower frequencies at con-
tact 3, where the 340 Hz tone elicited the strongest
response. The shape of the responses changed dramati-
cally from the medial to lateral contacts. Contacts 2 and 3
showed a clear biphasic response to most frequencies,
with a negative-going potential peaking about 100 ms
after stimulus onset, followed by a positive potential with
about 180 ms peak latency. Contact 5 showed a broad
negative-going potential with a latency of 180 ms. From
about 350–600 ms after stimulus onset, a long sustained
positive potential was recorded form medial and lateral
contacts. Noise and IRN stimulation
Recordings from the medial contacts 2 and 3 showed a
clear response to the noise onset (Fig. 2d, contact 2
¡101.8 V at 105 ms, contact 3 ¡84.3 V at 130 ms). There was no signiWcant response to the onset of the pitch. The lateral contact 5 showed a small response (¡30.4 V at
a 100 ms) to the noise onset, but a larger response to the
onset of pitch of ¡57.4 V amplitude at a latency of
220 ms after pitch onset. The amplitude of this response
Wrst reaches statistical signiWcance against the baseline var-
iance at 115.5 ms after pitch onset (P = 0.05, bootstrap
test). There was thus a clear double dissociation between
medial and lateral contact sites in their responses to sound
onset and pitch onset. The signiWcant diVerences between
the responses from contacts 5 and 2 to clicks and noises are
highlighted by thick black lines below the electrode traces
in Fig. 2 (P = 0.05, bootstrap test). Discussion
We recorded sound evoked potentials from a depth elec-
trode in an epilepsy patient’s auditory cortex. The results
should be interpreted with caution due to the limitations
inherent in experimenting with human patients. First, time
constraints allowed us to collect only a limited number of
responses and we therefore focus on robust long-latency
potentials. This is a simpliWcation given the variety of
smaller early and middle-latency responses that have been
found with previous depth electrode recordings from
Fig. 2 a–d Responses obtained
from the four electrode contacts
to clicks, pure-tones (average of
responses to all frequencies
shown), and noise stimuli. The
schematic outlines in the left
column show the location of the
contacts (white circles) with
respect to anatomical markers
(grey highlights as in Fig. 1c). The dotted line in d marks the
onset of IRN pitch in the contin-
uous noise stimulus. The grey
area around the traces shows the
bootstrap 95% conWdence inter-
val, and the thick black lines in
the lowest panel highlight
signiWcant amplitude diVerences
(P < 0.05, bootstrap test)
between responses from contacts
5 and 2. SOR sound onset
response, POR pitch onset
response

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

Fig. 3 Responses to pure-tones
of eight diVerent frequencies at
the four electrode contacts. At
contacts 2 and 3, responses are
strongly frequency dependent,
while the lateral contact (5)
shows very similar responses to
all frequencies
Fig. 4 Peak-to-peak amplitudes (upper row) within a time window
from 50 to 200 ms past stimulus onset (50–400 ms for contact 5) and
latencies (lower row) of the most prominent negative deXection (posi-
tive deXection for contact 4) of the responses to pure tones of eight
diVerent frequencies (ordinate, numbered from low to high, frequen-
cies as in Fig. 3) at the four contact sites (columns). The two medial
contacts show a strong frequency-dependence of both amplitudes and
latencies, whereas the amplitude and latency of the responses from the
lateral contact 5 is fairly independent of frequency

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

primary and secondary auditory cortex in man (Celesia
1976; Liegeois-Chauvel et al. 1994, 1991). The present
results can nevertheless be compared to the previously
reported long-latency pitch-related responses. Second, the
depth electrode was placed into possibly epileptogenic tis-
sue the functional properties of which may diVer from those
of healthy tissue. However, the morphology and latency of
auditory responses to clicks were comparable to typical
N100 scalp potentials recorded from healthy participants
(Näätänen and Picton 1987), suggesting a normal auditory
function at the sites of the electrode contacts in our patient. This is an important control given the patient’s longstand-
ing epilepsy and evidence of atrophy. Responses to pure-tones diVered markedly between
medial and lateral contacts, consistent with the view that
the lateral contacts record from secondary auditory cortex. Responses from contact 4 were relatively small and incon-
sistent for all stimuli, possibly because this contact picks up
conXicting response morphologies from neighboring
medial and lateral sites. The responses to iterated ripple
noise show a clear double dissociation between medial and
lateral contact sites. Medial secondary and primary auditory
cortex responded strongly to the onset of sound energy, but
did not respond to the onset of a pitch that was not accom-
panied by sound energy changes. Lateral secondary audi-
tory cortex showed the reverse pattern and responded
weakly to the sound onset but strongly to the pitch onset. The location of this response complements results form
previous neuroimaging studies demonstrating that the lat-
eral secondary auditory cortex extracts pitch from complex
sounds. Electrode placement
We recorded sound evoked potentials from a depth elec-
trode parallel and slightly posterior from Heschl’s gyrus. The location of the electrode was determined from the ste-
reotactic coordinates deWned during surgical planning. Although no post-implantation MRI was acquired is this
case, the stereotactical procedure is accurate to within
1 mm at the tip of the electrode. We were unable to record
signiWcant responses from the contact at the electrode tip,
which came to lie in white matter at the medial origin of
HG. A contact may become unusable after implantation for
several reasons, including contact wire failure and immune-
reaction coating of the contact surface. Electrical deXec-
tions measured at this contact were more than an order of
magnitude smaller than those from the neighbouring
contact and could not be distinguished from baseline with
statistical conWdence. The electrode’s wire contacts have low impedance, and
are sensitive to the local Weld potential within an area of
about 10 mm radius. From the absence of a response at one
contact we can thereby infer that the portion of STP in this
area around the contact does not participate in generating
the response. Conversely, the presence of a pitch-related
response in contact 5, the most lateral contact still within
grey matter, indicates that at least part of this response is
generated within about 1 cm3 of brain tissue including the
lateral tip of Heschl’s gyrus and adjacent superior temporal
gyrus. Response to clicks
The responses to clicks, stimuli that do not evoke a pitch
percept, are smallest at the lateral contact and increase in
magnitude by a factor of about 2.5 toward the medial con-
tacts. Clicks have been used in previous studies with depth
electrodes in the human auditory cortex, and several early
(<»30 ms) cortical potentials have been found to originate
from the medial two thirds of Heschl’s gyrus, probably pri-
mary auditory cortex (Celesia and Puletti 1969; Lee et al.
1984; Liegeois-Chauvel et al. 1991; Yvert et al. 2005). After that time, several areas become simultaneously
active, leading to high-amplitude long-latency potentials. For instance, Heschl’s gyrus, planum temporale, and supe-
rior temporal gyrus contribute to the scalp N1 potential
(Yvert et al. 2005). We were not able to resolve the rela-
tively weak early primary potentials, due to the location of
the electrode adjacent to, but not in, Heschl’s gyrus, and the
much lower number of stimulus repetitions for averaging
compared to studies focussing on early primary potentials
(Lee et al. 1984; Liegeois-Chauvel et al. 1991). Neverthe-
less, we observed a large negative-going wave in the
latency range of 95–115 ms at the medial contact—a com-
ponent of the scalp N1 potential. Negative deXections of
similar amplitude and latency have been previously
recorded with depth electrodes from this area (Celesia and
Puletti 1969; Godey et al. 2001; Yvert et al. 2005). The
insensitivity of this potential to pitch and its latency suggest
a close relation to the N110m described by Gutschalk and
colleagues (2004). The equivalent current dipole of the
N110m was localized to the lateral planum temporale;
our data suggest a more medial origin within planum
temporale. Response to pure-tones
Pure-tone stimuli evoke a pitch percept, and the onset of the
pitch coincides with the onset of sound energy. These stim-
uli resulted in strong responses from all electrode contacts
in HG. The latency and amplitude of responses from the
medial contacts depend strongly on stimulus frequency;
and the morphology of the response is very similar to the
click-evoked response. The variation of the response
latency in the medial contacts replicates earlier Wndings of

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

latency decreases on the order of 20 ms from low to high
frequencies in the N100 from scalp EEG (Woods et al.
1993) and N100m from MEG recordings (Lütkenhöner and
Steinsträter 1998; for review see Roberts et al. 2000; Roberts and Poeppel 1996). Liegeois-Chauvel and colleagues (2001) recorded
responses from depth electrodes in HG to pure tones of 8
diVerent frequencies between 250 Hz and 4 kHz. They
reported frequency-dependent changes in peak-to-peak
amplitudes of the P45/N100 complex very similar to our
results. An indication that this frequency-dependence may
be related to tonotopic organization comes from micro-
electrode depth recordings in a single patient by Howard
and colleagues (1996), who found diVerences in spectral
tuning of multi-units along the medio-lateral extension of
HG. Responses from the lateral contact do not depend on
stimulation frequency and show a very diVerent morphology
when compared to the medial responses or the lateral
response to clicks. Godey and colleagues (2001) compared
responses to clicks and pure-tones measured with MEG and
intracranial electrodes in HG and PT. For both types of stim-
uli they note a change in the morphology of the response
(shift to longer latency and broadening of the response
peaks) from medial to lateral contacts that is comparable to
our observations. The independence of the response latency
of stimulus frequency is somewhat surprising because the
pitch-onset response to IRN is known to depend systemati-
cally on pitch value (Krumbholz et al. 2003). The apparent
independence of pure-tone pitch value might have to do
with possible diVerences in the extraction of spectral versus
temporal pitch. There is some evidence that lateral Heschl’s
gyrus responds diVerently to diVerent types of pitch (but see
Chait et al. 2006; Hall and Plack 2007). The stark changes in the morphology of the responses
might be taken as an indication that at least part of the
response from the medial contacts comes from tonotopic
primary auditory cortex, whereas the lateral contact records
from non-tonotopic secondary auditory cortex. The very
small responses to clicks and white noise at the lateral con-
tact suggest that the response to pure-tones is mainly due to
the tonal character of the stimuli, with only a minor contri-
bution of response to the energy onset. Pitch onset response
A clear response to the onset of pitch within a noise was
found at the electrode contact close to the lateral tip of Hes-
chl’s gyrus, but not at the two contacts recording from
medial Heschl’s gyrus and medial planum temporale. Con-
versely, the response to the onset of sound energy was
larger by a factor of 2–3 at the medial sites than at the lat-
eral site. The pitch onset response reXects synchronized
activity from neurons in the auditory cortex that are
involved in pitch processing (Krumbholz et al. 2003). The
latency of the response depends on the period of the IRN
sound and is consistently larger than the latency of the
response to a sound energy onset (Krumbholz et al. 2003). In our data, the latency of sound onset responses from the
medial contacts varied between 100 and 130 ms for diVer-
ent stimuli, whereas the pitch onset response from the lat-
eral contact had a latency of 220 ms, although the peak is
relatively broad. The particular limitations of working with
the patient allowed us only to record a relatively low num-
ber of repetitions, and consequently there is a considerable
amount of noise in the responses. While this does not pre-
clude the detection of a response, it limits the accuracy of
amplitude and latency measurements. Although the largest
peak of the POR measured here occurred at 220 ms, the
response Wrst deviated signiWcantly from the response at
contact 2 at a smaller peak with a latency of about 115 ms. The true POR latency probably falls between the two val-
ues. Previous MEG experiments, using a higher number of
repetitions, have demonstrated latencies of around 150 ms
for similar pitch values (Gutschalk et al. 2004; Krumbholz
et al. 2003). Those studies also used equivalent current
dipole modelling to localize the generator of the pitch onset
response approximately to the lateral tip of Heschl’s gyrus
(Gutschalk et al. 2004; Krumbholz et al. 2003). Similarly,
fMRI studies demonstrated pitch-related responses on the
lateral Heschl’s gyrus and adjacent superior temporal
gyrus. Our data conWrm this location with depth-electrode
recordings from this area, a more direct method than used
in previous studies. Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. André Olivier and François
Dubeau for bringing the case to our attention and providing clinical
information, and to the patient himself for his cooperation with the pro-
cedures. We also acknowledge Dr. Jean Gotman’s assistance with
analysis of the EEG signals. The research was supported by research
grants from the German Academy of Sciences Leopoldina to M. S. and
from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to R. J. Z. References
Bendor D, Wang X (2005) The neuronal representation of pitch in
primate auditory cortex. Nature 436:1161–1165
Celesia GG (1976) Organization of auditory cortical areas in man. Brain 99:403–414
Celesia GG, Puletti F (1969) Auditory cortical areas of man. Neurol-
ogy 19:211–220
Chait M, Poeppel D, Simon JZ (2006) Neural response correlates of
detection of monaurally and binaurally created pitches in humans. Cereb Cortex 16:835–848
Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134:9–21
Denham S (2005) Pitch detection of dynamic iterated rippled noise by
humans and a modiWed auditory model. Biosystems 79:199–206

Exp Brain Res (2008) 187:97–105

Godey B, Schwartz D, de Graaf JB, Chauvel P, Liegeois-Chauvel C
(2001) Neuromagnetic source localization of auditory evoked
Welds and intracerebral evoked potentials: a comparison of data in
the same patients. Clin Neurophysiol 112:1850–1859
Goldstein JL (1973) An optimum processor theory for the central for-
mation of the pitch of complex tones. J Acoust Soc Am 54:1496–

GriYths TD, Buchel C, Frackowiak RS, Patterson RD (1998) Analysis
of temporal structure in sound by the human brain. Nat Neurosci
1:422–427
Gutschalk A, Patterson RD, Rupp A, Uppenkamp S, Scherg M (2002)
Sustained magnetic Welds reveal separate sites for sound level and
temporal regularity in human auditory cortex. Neuroimage
15:207–216
Gutschalk A, Patterson RD, Scherg M, Uppenkamp S, Rupp A (2004)
Temporal dynamics of pitch in human auditory cortex. Neuroim-
age 22:755–766
Hall DA, Plack CJ (2007) The human ‘pitch center’ responds diVer-
ently to iterated noise and Huggins pitch. Neuroreport 18:323–

Hall DA, Johnsrude IS, Haggard MP, Palmer AR, Akeroyd MA, Sum-
merWeld AQ (2002) Spectral and temporal processing in human
auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 12:140–149
Howard MA 3rd, Volkov IO, Abbas PJ, Damasio H, Ollendieck MC, Granner MA (1996) A chronic microelectrode investigation of the
tonotopic organization of human auditory cortex. Brain Res
724:260–264
Johnsrude IS, Penhune VB, Zatorre RJ (2000) Functional speciWcity in
the right human auditory cortex for perceiving pitch direction. Brain 123(Pt 1):155–163
Krumbholz K, Patterson RD, Seither-Preisler A, Lammertmann C, Lutkenhoner B (2003) Neuromagnetic evidence for a pitch pro-
cessing center in Heschl’s gyrus. Cereb Cortex 13:765–772
Lee YS, Lueders H, Dinner DS, Lesser RP, Hahn J, Klem G (1984)
Recording of auditory evoked potentials in man using chronic
subdural electrodes. Brain 107(Pt 1):115–131
Licklider JC (1951) A duplex theory of pitch perception. Experientia
7:128–134
Liegeois-Chauvel C, Musolino A, Chauvel P (1991) Localization of
the primary auditory area in man. Brain 114(Pt 1A):139–151
Liegeois-Chauvel C, Musolino A, Badier JM, Marquis P, Chauvel P
(1994) Evoked potentials recorded from the auditory cortex in
man: evaluation and topography of the middle latency compo-
nents. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 92:204–214
Liegeois-Chauvel C, Giraud K, Badier JM, Marquis P, Chauvel P
(2001) Intracerebral evoked potentials in pitch perception reveal
a functional asymmetry of the human auditory cortex. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 930:117–132
Lütkenhöner B, Steinsträter O (1998) High-precision neuromagnetic
study of the functional organization of the human auditory cortex. Audiol Neurootol 3:191–213
Meddis R, O’Mard L (1997) A unitary model of pitch perception. J Ac-
oust Soc Am 102:1811–1820
Meddis R, O’Mard LP (2006) Virtual pitch in a computational physio-
logical model. J Acoust Soc Am 120:3861–3869
Näätänen R, Picton T (1987) The N1 wave of the human electric and
magnetic response to sound: a review and an analysis of the com-
ponent structure. Psychophysiology 24:375–425
Olivier A, Germano IM, Cukiert A, Peters T (1994) Frameless stereo-
taxy for surgery of the epilepsies: preliminary experience. Tech-
nical note. J Neurosurg 81:629–633
Patterson R, Handel S, Yost WA, Datta AJ (1996) The relative strength
of the tone and noise components in iterated rippled noise. J Ac-
oust Soc Am 100:3286–3294
Patterson RD, Uppenkamp S, Johnsrude IS, GriYths TD (2002) The
processing of temporal pitch and melody information in auditory
cortex. Neuron 36:767–776
Penagos H, Melcher JR, Oxenham AJ (2004) A neural representation
of pitch salience in nonprimary human auditory cortex revealed
with functional magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci
24:6810–6815
Roberts TP, Poeppel D (1996) Latency of auditory evoked M100 as a
function of tone frequency. Neuroreport 7:1138–1140
Roberts TP, Ferrari P, StuZebeam SM, Poeppel D (2000) Latency of
the auditory evoked neuromagnetic Weld components: stimulus
dependence and insights toward perception. J Clin Neurophysiol
17:114–129
Schönwiesner M, Rübsamen R, von Cramon DY (2005) Hemispheric
asymmetry for spectral and temporal processing in the human an-
tero-lateral auditory belt cortex. Eur J Neurosci 22:1521–1528
Wiegrebe L, Hirsch HS, Patterson RD, Fastl H (2000) Temporal
dynamics of pitch strength in regular-interval noises: eVect of lis-
tening region and an auditory model. J Acoust Soc Am 107:3343–

Woods DL, Alain C, Covarrubias D, Zaidel O (1993) Frequency-relat-
ed diVerences in the speed of human auditory processing. Hear
Res 66:46–52
Yost WA (1996a) Pitch of iterated rippled noise. J Acoust Soc Am
100:511–518
Yost WA (1996b) Pitch strength of iterated rippled noise. J Acoust Soc
Am 100:3329–3335
Yost WA, Patterson R, Sheft S (1996) A time domain description for
the pitch strength of iterated rippled noise. J Acoust Soc Am
99:1066–1078
Yvert B, Fischer C, Bertrand O, Pernier J (2005) Localization of hu-
man supratemporal auditory areas from intracerebral auditory
evoked potentials using distributed source models. Neuroimage
28:140–153
Zatorre RJ (1988) Pitch perception of complex tones and human tem-
poral-lobe function. J Acoust Soc Am 84:566–572
Zatorre RJ, Belin P (2001) Spectral and temporal processing in human
auditory cortex. Cereb Cortex 11:946–953
