# PII: S0896-6273(02)01060-7

**Year:** D:20

---

Neuron, Vol. 36, 767–776, November 14, 2002, Copyright 2002 by Cell Press
The Processing of Temporal Pitch
and Melody Information in Auditory Cortex
et al., 2001; Rivier and Clarke, 1997; Hackett et al., 2001). This is consistent with the hierarchy of processing pro-
posed for auditory cortex on the basis of recent anatomi-
Roy D. Patterson,1,5 Stefan Uppenkamp,1
Ingrid S. Johnsrude,2 and Timothy D. Griffiths1,3,4
1Centre for the Neural Basis of Hearing
cal studies in the macaque (Hackett et al., 1998, 2001; Physiology Department
Kaas and Hackett, 2000; Rauschecker and Tian, 2000). University of Cambridge
Higher-level processes like pitch tracking and melody
Downing Street
extraction are thought to be performed in more distrib-
Cambridge CB2 3EG
uted regions beyond PAC, and the processing becomes
2MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit
asymmetric with more activity in the right hemisphere

### 15 Chaucer Road

(see Zatorre et al., 2002, for a review). The current paper
Cambridge CB2 2EF
presents cortical data from a functional magnetic reso-
3Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience
nance imaging (fMRI) study designed to increase the
Institute of Neurology
sensitivity of auditory imaging and enable us to locate

### 12 Queen Square

the neural centers involved in pitch and melody percep-
London WC1N 3BG
tion with much greater precision.
4Auditory Group
Studies of pitch processing often employ sinusoids
Newcastle University Medical School
that activate focal regions on the basilar membrane; Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH
these studies show that the tonotopic organization ob-
United Kingdom
served in the cochlea is preserved in all of the nuclei of
the auditory pathway up to PAC (for a review see Ehret
and Romand, 1997). It is also possible to produce a tone
Summary
with a strong pitch by regularizing the time intervals in
a broadband noise so that one time interval occurs more
An fMRI experiment was performed to identify the
often than any of the others (see Figure 1). As the degree
main stages of melody processing in the auditory path-
of regularity increases, the hiss of the noise dies away,
way. Spectrally matched sounds that produce no
and the pitch of the tonal component increases to the
pitch, fixed pitch, or melody were all found to activate
point where it dominates the perception. These regular-
Heschl’s gyrus (HG) and planum temporale (PT). Within
interval (RI) sounds (Yost, 1998) are like noise insofar
this region, sounds with pitch produced more activa-
as they produce essentially uniform excitation along the
tion than those without pitch only in the lateral half of
basilar membrane and, thus, uniform activity across the
HG. When the pitch was varied to produce a melody,
tonotopic dimension of neural activity in the auditory
there was activation in regions beyond HG and PT,
pathway (compare Figures 1B and 1G). The fact that
specifically in the superior temporal gyrus (STG) and
they produce a strong pitch without producing a set
planum polare (PP). The results support the view that
of harmonically related peaks in the internal spectrum
there is hierarchy of pitch processing in which the
shows that pitch can be coded temporally as well as
center of activity moves anterolaterally away from pri-
tonotopically in the auditory system. Figure 1 illustrates
mary auditory cortex as the processing of melodic
how the auditory system could extract the pitch informa-
sounds proceeds.
tion from RI sounds. A brief comparison of spectral and
temporal models of pitch is presented in Griffiths et al., Introduction
1998. RI sounds are useful in imaging because they enable
This paper is concerned with three auditory processes
us to generate sets of spectrally matched stimuli that
involved in the perception of melody, and how these
enhance the sensitivity of perceptual contrasts in func-
processes are organized in the ascending auditory path-
tional imaging. Their value was initially demonstrated
way. A melody in this case is simply a sequence of notes
by Griffiths et al. (1998), who used positron emission
like that produced when someone picks out a tune on
tomography (PET) to show that activation in HG in-
the piano with one finger. From the auditory perspective,
creases with the temporal regularity of RI sounds and
perception of a melody involves (1) detecting that seg-
that, when the pitch changes over time, there is addi-
ments of an extended sound contain temporal regularity,
tional activation in STG and PP. The power was limited,
(2) determining the pitch of each of these regular seg-
however, by constraints on radiation dose, and the spa-
ments, and (3) determining how the pitch changes from
tial resolution was poor compared to that of fMRI. For
note to note over the course of the sound. Physiological
these reasons, the results were restricted to group data,
studies (Palmer and Winter, 1992) and functional neuro-
and they are ambiguous with regard to the degree of
imaging (Hall et al., 2002; Griffiths et al., 2001; Wessinger
asymmetry at different stages. Subsequently, Griffiths
et al., 2001) suggest that the processing of temporal
et al. (2001) showed that the combination of RI sounds
regularity begins in the brainstem and that pitch extrac-
and fMRI was sufficiently sensitive to image all of the
tion is completed in HG, the site of primary auditory
subcortical nuclei of the auditory pathway simultane-
cortex (PAC) (Rademacher et al., 1993, 2001; Morosan
ously, provided the technique included cardiac gating
(Guimares et al., 1998) and many replications of each
stimulus condition. A contrast between the activation
5Correspondence: roy.patterson@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

Neuron

Figure 1. Simulated Neural Responses to a Random Noise and a Regular-Interval (RI) Sound with a Pitch of 83.3 Hz
The RI sound was constructed by: (1) delaying a copy of a random noise by 12 ms (1/83.3 Hz), (2) adding it back to the original noise, and
(3) repeating the process 16 times (Yost, 1996; see Experimental Procedures for details). The ordinate in (A)–(C) and (F)–(H) is the tonotopic
dimension of hearing, that is, place along the basilar membrane. (A) and (F) show the detailed temporal structure of the neural response at
the output of the cochlea (Patterson et al., 1995) for the noise and RI sound, respectively; the activity is similar for the two sounds. (B) and
(G) show that the average neural activity over time (Patterson, 1994) is very similar for the two sounds; there are no harmonically related
peaks in (G) to identify the pitch. (D) and (J) show that the average activity over channels is also very similar; there are no regularly repeating
features to identify the pitch of the RI sound. The temporal regularity that distinguishes the RI sound is in the time-interval information of the
neural patterns (A and F). When the time-intervals between peaks are calculated in the individual channels of (F) and summarized in the
corresponding time-interval histograms of (H), a concentration of activity appears at the RI delay (12 ms) (Patterson et al., 1996). In contrast,
the time-intervals in the neural pattern of noise (A) are randomly distributed in the time-interval histogram (C) (the concentration at 0 ms simply
indicates the presence of activity in the channel). The position and height of peaks in the average interval histogram (K) are used to evaluate
quantitative models of the pitch of RI sounds (e.g., Pressnitzer et al., 2001; Krumbholz et al., 2000).
produced by RI sounds with fixed pitch and spectrally
where the asymmetries reported by Zatorre et al. (2002)
first emerge.
matched noise revealed that temporal pitch processing
begins in subcortical structures. At the same time, a
Studies of cytoarchitecture have shown that a reliable
landmark for primary auditory cortex is the anteriormost,
contrast between sounds with varying pitch and fixed
pitch did not reveal an increase in activation in this
transverse temporal gyrus (of Heschl) (Rademacher et
al., 1993, 2001; Rivier and Clarke, 1997; Morosan et al.,
region. The fact that pitch processing begins in the
brainstem but is not completed there was interpreted
2001), and functional imaging studies have shown that
most complex sounds produce activation in PAC and
as further evidence for the hypothesis that there is a
neural hierarchy of melody processing in the auditory
surrounding areas in all normal listeners. The sensitivity
of the cortical data means that we can investigate
pathway (Griffiths et al., 1998). In this paper, we present
the cortical data from the fMRI experiment. The excep-
whether there are consistent differences between indi-
vidual listeners in the location of functional activation
tional sensitivity of the study enables us to track the
hierarchy of melody processing in auditory cortex
within auditory cortex, and whether the differences cor-
respond to differences in the sulcal and gyral morphol-
across HG and out into PP and STG, and determine

Melody Processing in the Temporal Lobe

Figure 2. Axial Projection of Group Activa-
tion in Glass Brain View for Various Contrasts
Top row: (A) noise versus silence, (B) fixed
pitch versus silence, (C) diatonic melody ver-
sus silence, and (D) random melody versus
silence. Middle row: (E) fixed pitch versus noise, (F)
diatonic melody versus noise, and (G) random
melody versus noise. Bottom row: (H) all sound conditions con-
trasted with silence. (J) diatonic melody ver-
sus fixed pitch and (K) random melody versus
fixed pitch. The height threshold for activation
was t  5.00 in every case (p  0.05 corrected
for multiple comparisons across the whole
volume). The arrows mark the approximate
position of Heschl’s gyrus in the two hemi-
spheres. The top row shows that these four
types of sound produce activation in essen-
tially the same cortical areas.
ogy of the individuals (Penhune et al., 1996; Leonard et
each hemisphere. The group activation is centered on
the mean position of HG in the right hemisphere and
al., 1998).
along the posterolateral side of HG in the left hemi-
sphere. Results
Individual Sound Conditions versus Silence
The individual sound conditions produced very similar
The anteriormost, transverse temporal gyrus of Heschl
patterns of activation when compared to silence, as
was identified in each of our listeners, and there was
shown in Figures 2A–2D. In the left hemisphere, there
good agreement between this specification of the loca-
is little to distinguish among the four contrasts in terms
tion of HG in our listeners and that obtained in other
of the region of activation; in the right hemisphere, the
studies. The details of the analysis are presented in
three sounds with pitch produce slightly more activity
Experimental Procedures. The group activation results
in the region just anterior to the lateral end of HG. Many
are presented first with respect to the average position
of the peaks in these contrasts have t values above ten,
of HG for the group. Then the variability of the activation
ranging in some cases up to 40, and these peaks appear
across listeners is compared to the variability of HG
with remarkable consistency in all of the contrasts in-
across listeners.
volving sound and silence. There are significant differ-
ences between conditions, but they are largely associ-
Regions of Activation in the Group
ated with different levels of activation at fixed positions
All Sounds versus Silence
within the main clusters rather than changes in the posi-
The activation produced by all four sound conditions
tions of peaks.
was compared to activation produced in the silence
Differential Sensitivity to Pitch
condition to illustrate the domain of cortical sensitivity
To reveal regions associated with the processing of
to sound; the contrast includes 2592 volumes from all
tonal sounds as opposed to noise, we examined the
nine listeners (fixed-effects analysis). In cortex, this con-
contrasts fixed versus noise, diatonic versus noise, and
trast yields bilateral activation in two large clusters
random versus noise (Figures 2E–2G). In the fixed versus
shown in of Figure 2H (all sound-silence). The clusters
noise comparison, the most prominent area of differen-
are centered in the region of HG and PT, as would be
tial activity was in lateral HG in both hemispheres. The
expected. Outside this region, there is essentially no
diatonic versus noise and random versus noise con-
other cortical activation, perhaps because it was a pas-
trasts both exhibited very similar activation to fixed ver-
sive listening experiment. The “V” of activity in the center
sus noise in HG. Anterior to HG, in the lateral part of PP,
of the panel is the subcortical activity reported in Grif-
diatonic versus noise and random versus noise revealed
fiths et al. (2001). The position of HG for the group of
listeners falls along the line between the arrowheads in
bilateral activation that did not appear in the fixed versus

Neuron

Figure 3. Group Activation for Four Con-
trasts Using a Fixed-Effects Model, Rendered
onto the Average Structural Image of the
Group
The height threshold for activation was t 
5.00 (p  0.05 corrected). Blue, noise versus
silence; red, fixed pitch versus noise; green,
diatonic melody versus fixed pitch; cyan, ran-
dom melody versus fixed pitch. The white
highlight shows the position of Heschl’s gyrus
(HG) (the average of the HG maps for the nine
individuals). The arrows show the midline of
HG separately in each hemisphere. The posi-
tion and orientation of the sections is illus-
trated in the bottom panels of the figure. The
sagittal sections show front to the left for the
left hemisphere and front to the right for the
right hemisphere.
noise contrast. With regard to melody processing, these
the head. The highlighted regions in the structural sections
show the average position of HG in the two hemispheres;
results suggest that there are a number of centers in
auditory cortex (HG and PT) that process all stimuli com-
these regions are replotted under the functional activa-
tion in the axial sections above the structural sections.
ing up from subcortical structures in both hemispheres,
and one of these regions in lateral HG is differentially
The functional activation shows that as a sequence of
noise bursts acquires the properties of melody (first
active in the presence of pitch. We also inverted the
three pitch versus noise contrasts to determine whether
pitch and then changing pitch), the region sensitive to
the added complexity changes from a large area on HG
there might be a region particularly concerned with the
processing of noise. No candidates were found; all of
and PT (blue) to a relatively focused area in the lateral
half of HG (red) and then on out into surrounding regions
the regions activated by noise were activated to at least
the same degree by sounds with pitch.
of PP and STG (green and cyan mixed). The orderly
progression is consistent with the hypothesis that the
Differential Sensitivity to Melody
To reveal regions associated with melody processing,
hierarchy of melody processing that begins in the brain-
stem continues in auditory cortex and subsequent re-
we examined the contrasts diatonic versus fixed and
random versus fixed (Figures 2J and 2K). Both contrasts
gions of the temporal lobe. The activation is largely sym-
metric in auditory cortex and becomes asymmetric
reveal differential activation to melody in STG and PP,
but in this case, the activation is asymmetric with more
abruptly as it moves on to PP and STG with relatively
more activity in the right hemisphere.
activity in the right hemisphere. In lateral HG and medial
HG, there is virtually no differential activation when com-
pared with the previous contrasts, indicating that mel-
Variability in Anatomy and Functional Activation
across Listeners
ody produced about the same level of activity as fixed
pitch in HG. This suggests that HG is involved in short-
In this section, we examine how the anatomy of Heschl’s
gyrus in individuals relates to the individual’s pattern of
term rather than longer-term pitch processing, such as
determining the pitch value or pitch strength rather than
functional activation, and how the functional data of
individuals relates to the pattern of activation observed
evaluating pitch changes across a sequence of notes. Diatonic versus Random Melody
in the group data. The analysis of the anatomy of HG was summarized
In an attempt to identify regions that might be specifi-
cally involved in processing diatonic melodies, we ex-
for each listener in terms of three points: (1) the centroid
of the complete volume of HG, (2) the position of the
amined the contrasts diatonic versus random and ran-
dom versus diatonic. Neither contrast revealed sig-
medial end of HG, and (3) the position of the lateral
end of HG (see Experimental Procedures). The group
nificant peaks in any region of the brain. As a result, the
data from the two melody conditions will be considered
centroids for each of these points are presented in Table
1 with the standard deviations; the table shows that,
together in most of the following discussions. Hierarchy of Melody Processing
following normalization, the variability in the position of
HG is minimal. Specifically, the standard deviations for
A summary of the results to this point is presented in
Figure 3. The structural and axial sections show the
the medial and central centroids are less than one voxel
(2 mm) in all three dimensions, and the standard devia-
activity in a plane parallel to the surface of the temporal
lobe and just below it; the sagittal sections are orthogo-
tions for the lateral centroid are less than two voxels on
average.
nal to the axial sections and they face outwards so that
in both cases, the view of the temporal lobe is from outside
With regard to the functional activation, the positions

Melody Processing in the Temporal Lobe

Table 1. Coordinates of Anatomical Landmarks and Functional Activation Peaks in Heschl’s Gyrus
Left
Right
x
y
z
x
y
z
Medial end of HG
35.8
26.9
10.5
36.0
26.3
10.3
(1.1)
(1.8)
(1.0)
(1.8)
(1.8)
(1.4)
Central HG
49.1
18.9
6.2
48.8
16.8
5.4
(1.7)
(2.0)
(1.0)
(1.3)
(1.8)
(1.2)
Lateral end of HG
62.1
9.7
4.8
61.2
7.8
3.3
(2.6)
(3.7)
(1.4)
(3.7)
(3.6)
(2.3)
Fixed versus noise
55.3
12.9
1.5
57.2
8.8
1.9
(Individual listeners)
(3.8)
(4.6)
(2.9)
(2.5)
(5.0)
(3.3)
Penhune et al., 1996
45.0
19.8
7.8
47.8
15.5
6.8
Morosan et al., 2001 (SPM normalized)
44.6
17.9
8.0
49.3
12.9
7.2
Rademacher et al., 2001
42.0
21.0
7.0
46.0
13.0
8.0
Coordinates of Heschl’s gyrus. The top three rows show the mean position of the center of Heschl’s gyrus and the medial and lateral ends
of Heschl’s gyrus, as determined from structural scans for the individual listeners. The fourth row shows the mean position of the peaks of
activation for the contrast fixed versus noise from individual listeners. The bottom three rows show the location of Heschl’s gyrus obtained
from previous studies.
of the major peaks are very consistent across conditions
conditions within listeners; for any one of the small blue
regions in an individual’s data, it is typically the case
within individuals. Nevertheless, the major peaks in the
group data do not coincide with those in the data of
that the region is activated by all of the different sounds
used in the experiment, and the peak in the region is
individuals. Indeed, there are essentially no peaks in the
group data that appear consistently for individuals. So,
often in exactly the same place in each condition. More-
over, the degree of activation is the same, inasmuch as
the position of a peak in the group data represents a
location where activation from individuals overlaps in
these regions rarely appear in contrasts involving one
of the pitch-producing sounds and noise, nor do they
some way; it is not the location where a majority of
the individuals all exhibit the same peak. In order to
appear when these contrasts are inverted. The obvious
hypothesis is that these regions of activation represent
understand the form of the variability across listeners,
axial and sagittal sections like those in Figure 3 were
centers that analyze broadband sounds for specific fea-
tures or properties other than pitch and they are in some-
prepared for all nine listeners. The sections are pre-
sented with one listener per row in Figure 4. The first
what different places in different listeners. Fixed versus Noise
thing that the figure reveals is that the regions of activa-
tion in individuals are more focal than in the group aver-
Within the region on lateral HG where sounds with pitch
produce more activation than noise (red in Figure 2),
age, indicating that the larger regions of activation in
the group data represent overlapping focal regions from
individual listeners have, on average, four significant
peaks in the left hemisphere and five in the right hemi-
individuals–regions which in an individual are highly con-
sistent across conditions. Moreover, variability in the
sphere. The peaks are shown in red in Figure 4 (Again,
listener 9 is an exception. The contrast yielded no signifi-
location of activation differs in the three contrasts: noise
versus silence (blue), fixed versus noise (red), and mel-
cant activation on the left and only one peak in a very
anterior region on the right; accordingly, listener 9 was
ody versus fixed (green). Accordingly, the variability is
analyzed separately for each contrast.
omitted from this analysis as well.). There is some varia-
tion in the pattern of activation; on the right, the activity
Noise versus Silence
Noise produces foci of activation in the region of HG
for listeners 1, 6, and 7 appears to be slightly anterior
to HG, and on the left, the activity for listeners 4, 5, 6,
and/or PT in all listeners. The activation appears along
the posterolateral edge of HG for some listeners (2, 3,
and 8 appears to be slightly posterior to HG. However,
the region is small relative to the relatively large regions
4, and 7), but not others (1, 5, 6, and 8). There is a region
of activation at the posteromedial end of HG for some
of activation produced by the noise versus silence con-
trast.
listeners (1, 2, 4, and 5), but not others (3, 6, and 8), and
there is a concentration of activation anterior to HG in
Centroids were calculated for the fixed versus noise
peaks in each hemisphere for each listener and aver-
some listeners (3, 5, and 7), but not others. In short,
the noise activation in individuals is restricted to focal
aged across listeners; their coordinates are presented
in the fourth row of Table 1. The functional centroid for
regions of HG and PT, and together these regions pro-
duce the larger noise versus silence region in the group
the group is between the central and lateral anatomical
centroids and a little below the line of anatomical
data. Within this larger region, however, the distribution
of functional activation is quite variable across listeners.
centroids for the group. The standard deviations for the
functional centroids are a little greater than those for
(The data of listener 9 are included in Figure 4 for com-
pleteness, but they are omitted from this analysis be-
the anatomical centroids at the lateral end of HG but,
in general, the variability of the functional centroids is
cause the pattern of activation is so different from that
of the other eight listeners.)
comparable to that of the anatomical centroids for the
fixed versus noise contrast. This relatively small, bilat-
This pattern of variation in the noise activation stands
in marked contrast to the consistency of peaks across
eral region in lateral HG would appear to be a prime

Neuron

Figure 4. Activation for Three Contrasts in Individual Listeners (1–9) Rendered on Sections of Their Individual Structural Images
The orientation of the axial sections is the same as in Figure 3. The height threshold for activation was t  5.00 (p  0.001 uncorrected). Clusters with fewer than eight voxels were excluded from the figure to focus attention on the more significant clusters. The plane of each
sagittal section is given in mm in Talairach-like space in each of the respective panels. The position of the individual’s HG is highlighted in
each case. The pairs of black arrows show the position of HG in the group. Blue, noise versus silence; red, fixed pitch versus noise; green,
diatonic and random melodies versus fixed pitch.
candidate for a pitch center or tone processing center
able across listeners than the processing of pitch
information in lateral HG.
in auditory cortex. Melody produces essentially the same amount of acti-
Melody versus Fixed
vation as noise in PT and medial HG; in lateral HG, There are three regions where melody produces more
melody produces only slightly more activation than fixed
activation than fixed pitch: one at the lateral end of HG,
pitch, and so the regions of differential activation to
one in STS, and one in PP. Figure 4 shows that there is
melody (green) are largely separate from those associ-
somewhat more of this activity (green) in the individual
ated with noise and fixed pitch. The exception is in
data than in the group data (green and cyan in Figure 3),
lateral HG, where listeners 2, 3, 6, and 7 exhibit some
and the asymmetry is less pronounced in the individual
differential activation to melody within the region of acti-
data. There are two reasons for this: (1) the height thresh-
vation associated with fixed pitch. It may be that lateral
old was reduced for the individual data (p  0.001 uncor-
HG is involved in detecting when a pitch changes and
rected), and (2) the location of the activity is highly vari-
the regions in PP and STS are involved in evaluating the
able across listeners, so much of it does not appear in
pitch contour on a longer time scale.
the average. With regard to asymmetry, for five of the
Summary of Listener Variability
nine listeners (1, 2, 3, 4, and 6), there is more activation
Eight of the nine listeners exhibit the hierarchy of melody
in the right hemisphere than the left; the activation is
processing observed in the group analysis. Within indi-
roughly balanced for listener 7, and listeners 5, 8, and
viduals, the locations of the peaks associated with the
9 exhibit little or no melody versus fixed activity. In the
processing of noise and fixed pitch are highly consistent
right hemisphere, six of the nine listeners have two re-
across stimulus conditions. Across listeners, however,
gions of melody activation, but none has activity in all
the locations of the peaks associated with noise vary
three of the regions identified in the average data, and
considerably. Similarly, the locations of peaks associ-
no one combination of areas is overly common. In the
ated with the processing of melody in PP and STG vary
left hemisphere, there is generally less activity and there
considerably across individuals. The variability in the
is no discernible pattern. So, the distribution of activa-
location of HG is small relative to the functional variabil-
tion associated with the processing of melody informa-
ity, and so the variability in the functional activation
cannot be explained in terms of the gross anatomy.
tion outside auditory cortex is considerably more vari-

Melody Processing in the Temporal Lobe

Discussion
and right hemispheres, respectively, and the difference
was not significant (t  1.47, df  7, and p  0.19). With regard to the hierarchy of melody processing: the
For all eight listeners, prominent peaks occurred in the
fact that the contrast between fixed pitch and noise
melody versus noise contrast and the random versus
activates a region lateral to PAC on HG and the fact that
noise contrast at precisely the same positions as in the
the contrast between melody and fixed pitch produces
fixed versus noise contrast, and so the analysis was
activation outside of HG and PT supports the hypothesis
extended to these peaks as well, since they were as-
that there is a hierarchy of pitch processing in human
sumed to represent the operation of the pitch extraction
cerebral cortex with the activation moving anterolater-
mechanism in the melody conditions. The average val-
ally as processing proceeds. There are limited anatomi-
ues for the melody versus noise contrast were 8.3 (left)
cal data concerning connectivity in human cerebral cor-
and 9.3 (right), and the difference was not significant
tex, but the relevant studies (Howard et al., 2000; Tardif
(p  0.39). The average values for the random versus
and Clarke, 2001; Hackett et al., 2001) are consistent
noise contrast were 8.2 (left) and 9.2 (right); the differ-
with the hierarchy of processing suggested by the func-
ence was not significant (p  0.09). This suggests that
tional data. Anatomical studies of the macaque show
pitch processing is largely symmetric in the hierarchy
that auditory cortex is composed of a central core, a
up to and including lateral HG.
surrounding belt, and a lateral parabelt (Hackett et al., Pronounced asymmetries are largely limited to the
1998) and that this cortical system is connected hierar-
melody versus fixed contrast in the current study, and
chically (Kaas and Hackett, 2000). The core contains
they emerge as the activation moves from HG out onto
three regions: A1; a more rostral region, R; and an even
PP and STG. This interpretation is consistent with a host
more rostrotemporal region, RT (e.g., Kaas and Hackett,
of neuropsychological studies. One of the earlier ones
2000). A recent comparative study of auditory cortex in
(Samson and Zatorre, 1988) shows that patients with
macaques, chimpanzees, and humans (Hackett et al.,
anterior temporal-lobe resections (sparing HG) are more
2001) suggests that core in macaques corresponds to
impaired when detecting a single note change in a pat-
the central three quarters of HG in humans. In our func-
tern of three notes if the resections are on the right.
tional data, the centroid of the activity associated with
A recent study (Johnsrude et al., 2000) indicates that
pitch on HG (shown in red in Figure 3) is somewhat
patients with anterior temporal-lobe excisions that en-
lateral and anterior to the region of HG traditionally asso-
croach upon the anterolateral extremity of HG in the
ciated with PAC. This suggests that the pitch region
right hemisphere, but not in the left, are more impaired
corresponds to the R or RT region of core. It should be
when discriminating the direction of a melodic contour.
noted, however, that the centroid of the pitch center in
Similarly, functional neuroimaging studies, which show
our study is below the central axis of HG, which may
relatively more activity in the right hemisphere in re-
mean that it is not R or RT. The extra activation produced
sponse to melodic sounds, support the hypothesis that
by melodies in STG and lateral PP is outside the core
the asymmetry is greater in regions anterior to auditory
area; the region of activation in STG may correspond to
cortex (e.g., Zatorre et al., 1994; see Zatorre et al., 2002,
a parabelt region in macaque, but the region in lateral
for a review). PP seems rather anterior to be a parabelt region. In any
In their PET study, Griffiths et al. (1998) performed an
event, the functional hierarchy of melody processing
interaction analysis to find areas where activity in-
revealed in humans would appear to be consistent with
creased as a function of pitch strength, more for melo-
the hierarchy of anatomical connections reported for
dies than for fixed pitch, and found two pairs of relatively
macaques.
lateral regions–a posterior pair near the intersection of
With regard to the emergence of asymmetry in the
PT and STG (58, 42, 2 and 72, 40, 6) and an
hierarchy: in the study of subcortical activation (Griffiths
anterior pair on PP (54, 10, 18 and 58, 12, 26). The
et al., 2001), the fixed versus noise contrast revealed
contrast between melody and fixed pitch in the current
symmetric activation in the brainstem and slightly asym-
fMRI experiment is reasonably comparable, and Figures
metric activation in the auditory thalamus with greater
2J and 2K show activation in similar regions to those in
activation on the right; together these findings led to
the PET study; the peaks in the posterior regions are at
the conclusion that subcortical processing of temporal
62, 28, 2 and 66, 30, 2 and those in the anterior
regularity was largely symmetric. With regard to auditory
regions are at 56, 6, 10 and 54, 14, 16. The activa-
cortex, the PET study of Griffiths et al. (1998) revealed
tion in the fMRI study is more asymmetric than in the PET
bilateral activation that increased with the strength of
study, perhaps because it had greater spatial resolution.
the pitch produced by the RI sounds, although the acti-
There is also a recent study that relates musical ability,
vation was somewhat asymmetric within respect to HG.
magnetoencephalographic (MEG) responses to modu-
It was centered on HG in the right hemisphere and to-
lated sinusoids, and gray matter volume in HG (Schnei-
ward the lateral end of HG in the left hemisphere. The
der et al. (2002). They found that the volume of gray
data from the current study indicate that all the broad-
matter in HG was significantly greater in a group of
band stimuli produce bilateral and relatively symmetric
professional musicians than amateur and nonmusicians,
activity in auditory cortex (HG and PT) (the blue and
and the professionals had stronger MEG responses in
red regions in Figure 3). A specific test for hemispheric
medial HG. The data were symmetric for amateur musi-
asymmetry was performed for the fixed versus noise
cians and nonmusicians (consistent with our data), but
contrast associated with pitch processing in lateral HG
there was a small, significant asymmetry for professional
(as before, listener 9 was omitted from the analysis).
musicians. So for professional musicians, the asymme-
The t value for the most prominent peak in this contrast
try associated with melody may emerge one stage ear-
was identified for each of the listeners in each hemi-
sphere. The average values were 6.3 and 6.8 in the left
lier in the hierarchy of melody processing. Neuron

The Hemispheric Specialization Hypothesis
PT independent of whether they produced a pitch or
whether the pitch was changing over time. The fixed-
In their review of asymmetry in response to speech and
musical sounds, Zatorre et al. (2002) conclude that the
pitch stimuli produced more activation than noise in
lateral HG, bilaterally. The noise and fixed-pitch stimuli
processing of sounds with musical pitch results in rela-
tively more activity in the right hemisphere, whereas the
did not produce any substantial regions of activation
outside HG and PT. When the pitch was varied to pro-
processing of sounds with critical timing information,
like syllables with plosive consonants, results in rela-
duce a melody, the sound produced additional, asym-
metric activation in STG and lateral PP with relatively
tively more activity in the left hemisphere. They then go
on to propose that the auditory system has developed
more activity in the right hemisphere. While it is not possible at this time to be precise about
“… parallel and complementary systems–one in each
hemisphere–specialized for rapid temporal processing
the mechanics of auditory information processing at
each stage, if we assume that there are three stages
(left) or for fine spectral processing (right) respectively”
(page 40), and they draw an analogy with the uncertainty
of melody information processing as proposed in the
introduction, and they occur in the order specified, then
principle as it applies to time and frequency constraints
in the spectrogram (their Box 2). Note that the discussion
the broad mapping from stage of processing to brain
region would appear to be as follows. (1) The extraction
of the data is in terms of pitch, while the HS hypothesis
and the analogy are described in terms of spectral pro-
of time-interval information from the neural firing pattern
in the auditory nerve and the construction of time-inter-
cessing. The activation associated with the pitch and
melody of RI sounds appears to be largely compatible
val histograms (e.g., the rows of Figures 1C and 1H),
probably occurs in the brainstem and thalamus. (2) De-
with the pitch and melody activation discussed by Za-
torre et al. (2002), as noted above. It seems somewhat
termining the specific value of a pitch and its salience
from the interval histograms probably occurs in lateral
difficult, however, to reconcile the processing of RI
sounds with the part of the HS hypothesis that says
HG (e.g., by producing a summary histogram as in Fig-
ures 1E and 1K and locating the first peak). (3) Determin-
that the right hemisphere is specialized for fine spectral
processing.
ing that the pitch changes in discrete steps and tracking
the changes in a melody probably occurs beyond audi-
The HS hypothesis suggests that pitch is the result
of fine spectral processing in auditory cortex or, to be
tory cortex in STG and/or lateral PP. It would appear
to be these latter processes associated with melody
more specific, that pitch arises from the detection of
harmonically related peaks in the tonotopic representa-
processing rather than pitch extraction per se that give
rise to the asymmetries observed in neuropsychological
tion of the Fourier magnitude spectrum of the sound
as it occurs in or near auditory cortex (the concept is
and functional neuroimaging studies.
illustrated in Figures 1A and 1B of Griffiths et al., 1998). Experimental Procedures
This cannot be the case for the RI sounds in this study,
since there are no harmonically related peaks across
Subjects
the tonotopic dimension of the representation at any
Nine normal-hearing listeners volunteered as subjects after giving
level in the auditory system (Figure 1G of the current
informed consent (six male, three female, mean age 34.3  8.9
paper). Moreover, the fine-grain timing information ob-
years). None of the listeners had any history of hearing disorders
served in physiological responses at the level of the
or neurological disorders.
brainstem is not observed in auditory cortex. This is
what led us to suggest that the differential activation in
Stimulus Generation
The stimuli were sequences of noise bursts and regular-interval (RI)
lateral HG is associated with the calculation of precise
sounds. A RI sound is created by delaying a copy of a random noise
values for pitch and pitch strength from the heights and
and adding it back to the original. The perception has some of the
widths of the peaks in a representation something like
hiss of the original random noise and also a weak pitch with a
that shown in Figure 1K. It may be that the same area
frequency at the inverse of the delay time. The strength of this pitch
calculates precise spectral pitch values when the tono-
increases when the delay-and-add process is repeated (Yost et al.,
1996). When the pitch is less than about 125 Hz and the stimuli are
topic representation in auditory cortex exhibits peaks
high-pass filtered at about 500 Hz, the RI sounds effectively excite
and that the specialization is not so much one of fine
all frequency channels in the same way as random noise (Patterson
spectral processing in auditory cortex to extract an ac-
et al., 1996); compare the frequency profiles in Figures 1G and 1B.
curate pitch estimate, but more one of accurate monitor-
The perception of pitch in this case is based on extracting time
ing of the pitch information flowing from auditory cortex
intervals rather than spectral peaks from the neural pattern pro-
in subsequent centers concerned with whether the
duced by the RI sound in the auditory nerve; compare the frequency
profile in Figure 1G with the time-interval profile in Figure 1K. Quanti-
sound has the kind of stable pitch exhibited by musical
tative models of the pitch of RI sounds based on peaks in the time-
notes, and what the intervals are when the pitch jumps
interval profile have proven highly successful (e.g., Pressnitzer et
from one note to another. A modified version of the HS
al., 2001).
hypothesis in which the specialization involves fine pitch
There were five conditions in the experiment: four sound condi-
tracking rather than fine spectral processing would ap-
tions and a silent baseline. The sounds were sequences of 32 notes
pear to be in good agreement with the data, but in this
played at the rate of four notes/s (8 s total duration). Each note
was 200 ms in duration and there were 50 ms of silence between
case, the analogy with the uncertainty principle would
successive notes. The sounds were (1) random noise with no pitch
seem somewhat tenuous.
(noise) and three RI sounds in which the pitch was (2) fixed for a
given 32-note sequence (fixed), (3) varied to produce novel diatonic
Conclusions
melodies (diatonic), or (4) varied to produced random note melodies
All of the broadband sounds in this study produced
(random). The pitch range for the diatonic and random melodies
was 50 to 110 Hz. The pitch in the fixed-pitch sequences was varied
activation bilaterally in a number of centers in HG and

Melody Processing in the Temporal Lobe

randomly between sequences to cover the same range as the melo-
centroids for a normalized version of their PAC data (p. 677). To
ensure comparability, we obtained the raw data for nine cases from
dies over the course of the experiment. All of the sounds were
band-pass filtered between 500 and 4000 Hz using fourth-order
Rademacher and colleagues, and we applied the default, smoothly
nonlinear, normalization of SPM99 to the data. Centroids were then
Butterworth filters and presented to both ears at 75 dB SPL through
magnet-compatible, high-fidelity electrostatic headphones (Palmer
calculated for these maps using the same probability-weighted
function applied to the Penhune maps. All three sets of centroids
et al., 1998).
are listed in Table 1. Note that the estimates based on HG and PAC
data are almost identical.
fMRI Protocol
Overall, the positions for HG estimated from the current study are
Sparse temporal sampling was used to separate the scanner noise
in good agreement with the positions derived in previous studies.
and the experimental sounds in time (Edmister et al., 1999; Hall
The group centroid in the current study is more anterior on the right
et al., 1999). Blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) contrast-
than on the left (t (8df)  3.69, p  0.01), consistent with previous
image volumes were acquired every 12 s, using a 2.0-T MRI scanner
reports. A comparison with other studies shows a displacement of
(Siemens, VISION, Erlangen) with gradient-echo-planar imaging (TR/
5–7.7 mm in the left and 3.2–5.9 mm in the right hemisphere. There
TE  12,000 ms/35 ms). A total of 48 axial slices were acquired
was a significant difference (t  2.71, p  0.05) in left/right displace-
covering the whole brain. Each condition was repeated 48 times in
ment when compared with the centroids of HG, while this displace-
random order. A T1-weighted MPRAGE high-resolution (1  1 
ment was not significantly different from the estimates of the center
1.5 mm) structural image was also collected from each subject on
of PAC (see Table 1). One-group t tests, testing for significant dis-
the same MR system. Further details are presented in Griffiths et
placement (2-tailed) between left and right hemispheres separately
al. (2001).
for x, y, and z revealed that only the x coordinate in the left and the
z coordinate in the right were significantly different in location from
Data Processing and Analysis
all three other estimates. Our x coordinate in the left is, on average, Structural and functional data were processed and analyzed using
5.2 mm (individual averages range 4.1–7.1 mm) more lateral than in
SPM99 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). The BOLD time series
the other estimates. Our z coordinate in the right is 2.0 mm inferior
was realigned to the first image of the series and then the structural
to the other estimates (individual average range 1.4–2.6 mm).
image was coregistered to these images and resampled to 2  2 
2 mm resolution. The realigned BOLD images were normalized to
Acknowledgments
the standard SPM EPI template (ICBM 152, Brett et al., 2002) using
affine and smoothly nonlinear spatial transformations: the same
The research was supported by the UK Medical Research Council
normalization parameters were applied to the structural images.

## (G9900369, G9901257). The resulting images are in standardized, Talairach-like space. The
ICBM-152 template creates images that are a few millimeters dis-
Received: May 23, 2002
placed from the Talairach brain (Talairach and Tournoux, 1988), Revised: September 24, 2002
particularly in the superior-inferior (z) dimension (Brett et al., 2002). This is the reason for the phrase Talairach-like. Finally, the functional
References
data were smoothed with a Gaussian filter of 5 mm (full-width at
half maximum). Fixed-effects analyses were conducted on each
Brett, M., Johnsrude, I. S., and Owen, A. M. (2002). The problem of
listener’s data (288 scans) and across the whole group of subjects
functional localization in the human brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 3,
(with a total of 2592 scans) using the general linear model. The
243–249.
height threshold for group activation was t  5.00 (p  0.05 corrected
for multiple comparisons across the whole volume). It was reduced
Edmister, W. B., Talavage, T. M., Ledden, P. J., and Weisskoff, R. M.
somewhat for the individual data to t  5.00 (p  0.001 uncorrected).
(1999). Improved auditory cortex imaging using clustered volume
acquisitions. Hum. Brain Mapp. 7, 89–97. Evaluation of Individual Anatomy
Ehret, G., and Romand, R. (1997). The Central Auditory System (New
In order to observe the relationship between functional activation
York: Oxford University Press).
and macroscopic anatomy, the putative location of primary auditory
Griffiths, T. D., Bu¨ chel, C., Frackowiak, R. S. J., and Patterson, R. D.
cortex was identified in each listener. All four of the authors labeled
(1998). Analysis of temporal structure in sound by the brain. Nat.
the first transverse temporal gyrus (HG) in both hemispheres of
Neurosci. 1, 422–427.
each listener, using a software labeling package (MRIcro: http://
Griffiths, T. D., Uppenkamp, S., Johnsrude, I., Josephs, O., and Pat-
www.psychology.nottingham.ac.uk/staff/crl/mricro.html)
and
the
terson, R. D. (2001). Encoding of the temporal regularity of sound in
anatomical criteria suggested by Penhune et al. (1996). Both white
the human brainstem. Nat. Neurosci. 4, 633–637.
and gray matter were included in the labeled volumes. In some
Guimares, A. R., Melcher, J. R., Talavage, T. M., Baker, J. R., Ledden,
listeners HG is duplicated or partially duplicated (Penhune et al., P., Rosen, B. R., Kiang, N. Y. S., Fullerton, B. C., and Weisskoff, R. M.
1996; Leonard et al., 1998). In this study, the duplication was ignored,
(1998). Imaging subcortical activity in humans. Hum. Brain. Mapp.
and the labeling was restricted to the part of HG anterior to any
6, 33–41.
dividing sulcus (Rademacher et al., 1993; 2001). So our estimates
of the extent of primary auditory cortex are a little more conservative
Hackett, T. A., Stepniewska, I., and Kaas, J. H. (1998). Subdivisions
than is traditional (Rademacher et al., 2001).
of auditory cortex and ipsilateral cortical connections of the parabelt
The labeling of the four judges was combined to produce a labeled
auditory cortex in macaque monkeys. J. Comp. Neurol. 394,
volume of HG for each listener by including all voxels that two
475–495.
or more judges had labeled as part of HG. The result is a three-
Hackett, T. A., Preuss, T. M., and Kaas, J. H. (2001). Architectonic
dimensional HG map that is coregistered with the individual’s func-
identification of the core region in auditory cortex of macaques,
tional data. Finally, a mean HG volume was created for the group
chimpanzees, and humans. J. Comp. Neurol. 441, 197–222.
by averaging across the nine individually labeled volumes. Hall, D. A., Haggard, M. P., Akeroyd, M. A., Palmer, A. R., Summerfield, A. Q., Elliott, M. R., Gurney, E. M., and Bowtell, R. W. (1999). “Sparse”
Comparison of Anatomy with Previous Studies
temporal sampling in auditory fMRI. Hum. Brain Mapp. 7, 213–223. The location of HG obtained in the current study was compared
Hall, D. A., Johnsrude, I. J., Haggard, M. P., Palmer, A. R., Akeroyd,
with that obtained in one morphological study (Penhune et al., 1996)
M. A., and Summerfield, A. Q. (2002). Spectral and temporal pro-
and one cytoarchitectonic study (Morosan et al., 2001, Rademacher
cessing in human auditory cortex. Cereb. Cortex 12, 140–149.
et al., 2001): in the former, HG was identified on the MR scans of
20 individuals; in the latter, PAC was identified in brains of ten
Howard, M. A., Volkov, I. O., Mirsky, R., Garell, P. C., Noh, M. D., Gran-
ner, M., Damasio, H., Steinschneider, M., Reale, R. A., Hind, J. E.,
individuals. Probability volumes of HG were obtained from Penhune,
and centroids were calculated for the volumes in a probability-
and Brugge, J. F. (2000). Auditory cortex on the human posterior
superior temporal gyrus. J. Comp. Neurol. 416, 79–92.
weighted fashion (Hall, et al., 2002). Rademacher et al. (2001) report

Neuron

Johnsrude, I. S., Penhune, V. B., and Zatorre, R. J. (2000). Functional
Yost, W. A. (1996). Pitch of iterated rippled noise. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 511–518.
specificity in the right human auditory cortex for perceiving pitch
direction. Brain 123, 155–163. Yost, W. A. (1998). Auditory processing of sounds with temporal
regularity: Auditory processing of regular-interval stimuli. In Psycho-
Kaas, J. H., and Hackett, T. A. (2000). Subdivisions of auditory cortex
physical and Physiological Advances in Hearing, A. Palmer, A. Rees,
and processing streams in primates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, Q. Summerfield, and R. Meddis, eds. (London: Whurr), pp. 546–553.
11793–11799. Yost, W. A., Patterson, R. D., and Sheft, S. (1996). A time-domain
Krumbholz, K., Patterson, R. D., and Pressnitzer, D. (2000). The lower
description for the pitch strength of iterated rippled noise. J. Acoust.
limit of pitch as determined by rate discrimination. J. Acoust. Soc. Soc. Am. 99, 1066–1078. Am. 108, 1170–1180. Zatorre, R. J., Evans, A. C., and Meyer, E. (1994). Neural mechanisms
Leonard, C. M., Puranik, C., Kuldau, J. M., and Lombardino, L. J.
underlying melodic perception and memory for pitch. J. Neurosci.
(1998). Normal variation in the frequency and location of human
14, 1908–1919.
auditory cortex landmarks. Heschl’s gyrus: where is it? Cereb. Cor-
tex 8, 397–406. Zatorre, R. J., Belin, P., and Penhune, V. B. (2002). Structure and
functions of auditory cortex: music and speech. Trends Cogn. Sci. Morosan, P., Rademacher, J., Schleicher, A., Amunts, K., Schor-
6, 37–46.
mann, T., and Zilles, K. (2001). Human primary auditory cortex: sub-
divisions and mapping into a spatial reference system. Neuroimage
13, 684–701. Palmer, A. R., and Winter, I. M. (1992). Cochlear nerve and cochlear
nucleus responses to the fundamental frequency of voiced speech
sounds and harmonic complex tones. In Auditory Physiology and
Perception. Y Cazals, L. Demany, and K. Horner, eds. (Oxford: Per-
gamon), pp. 231–239. Palmer, A. R., Bullock, D. C., and Chambers, J. D. (1998). A high-
output, high-quality sound system for use in auditory fMRI. Neuro-
image 7, S359. Patterson, R. D. (1994). The sound of a sinusoid: time-interval mod-
els. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 96, 1419–1428. Patterson, R. D., Allerhand, M., and Giguere, C. (1995). Time-domain
modelling of peripheral auditory processing: a modular architecture
and a software platform. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 98, 1890–1894. Patterson, R. D., Handel, S., Yost, W. A., and Datta, A. J. (1996). The
relative strength of the tone and noise components in iterated rip-
pled noise. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 3286–3294. Penhune, V. B., Zatorre, R. J., MacDonald, J. D., and Evans, A. C.
(1996). Interhemispheric anatomical differences in human primary
auditory cortex: probabilistic mapping and volume measurement
from magnetic resonance scans. Cereb. Cortex 6, 661–672. Pressnitzer, D., Patterson, R. D., and Krumbholz, K. (2001). The lower
limit of melodic pitch. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 109, 2074–2084. Rademacher, J., Caviness, V. S., Steinmetz, H., and Galaburda, A. M.
(1993). Topographical variation of the human primary cortices and
its relevance to brain mapping and neuroimaging studies. Cereb. Cortex 3, 313–329. Rademacher, J., Morosan, P., Schormann, T., Schleicher, A., Wer-
ner, C., Freund, H. J., and Zilles, K. (2001). Probabilistic mapping
and volume measurement of human primary auditory cortex. Neuro-
image 13, 669–683. Rauschecker, J. P., and Tian, B. (2000). Mechanisms and streams
for processing ‘what’ and ‘where’ in auditory cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 11800–11806. Rivier, F., and Clarke, S. (1997). Cytochrome oxidase, acetylcholin-
esterase, and NADPH-diaphorase staining in human supratemporal
and insular cortex: evidence for multiple auditory areas. Neuroimage
6, 288–304. Samson, S., and Zatorre, R. J. (1988). Melodic and harmonic discrimi-
nation following unilateral cerebral excision. Brain Cogn. 7, 348–360. Schneider, P., Scherg, M., Gu¨ nter Dosch, H., Specht, H. J., Gultshalk, A., and Rupp, A. (2002). Morphology of Heschl’s gyrus reflects en-
hanced activation in the auditory cortex of musicians. Nat. Neurosci.
5, 688–694. Talairach, P., and Tournoux, J. (1988). Co-Planar Stereotaxic Atlas
of the Human Brain. (Stuttgart: Thieme). Tardif, E., and Clarke, S. (2001). Intrinsic connectivity in human audi-
tory areas: tracing study with DiI. Eur. J. Neurosci. 13, 1045–1050. Wessinger, M., Van Meter, J., Tian, B., Pekar, J., and Rauschecker, J. P. (2001). Hierarchical organisation of the human auditory cortex
revealed by functional magnetic resonance imaging. J. Cogn. Neu-
rosci. 13, 1–7.
