# S2056469422000833jrv 328..336

**Year:** D:20

---

EDIFY (Eating Disorders: Delineating Illness and
Recovery Trajectories to Inform Personalised
Prevention and Early Intervention in Young People):
project outline
Amelia Hemmings,1
Helen Sharpe,2 Karina Allen,1,3 Heike Bartel,4 Iain C. Campbell,1
Sylvane Desrivières,1 Richard J. B. Dobson,1,5–8 Amos A. Folarin,1,5,7 Tara French,9 Jonathan Kelly,10
Nadia Micali,11,12
Sneha Raman,9 Janet Treasure,1,3 Ruby Abbas,13 Beck Heslop,13 Tallulah Street,13
Ulrike Schmidt1,3
BJPsych Bulletin (2023) 47, 328–336, doi:10.1192/bjb.2022.83
1Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and
Neuroscience, King’s College London, London, UK; 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK; 3South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; 4University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK; 5Institute of Health
Informatics, University College London, London, UK; 6Health Data Research UK
London, University College London, London, UK; 7National Institute for
Health and Care Research Biomedical
Research Centre at South London and
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and
King’s College London, London, UK;
8National Institute for Health and
Care Research Biomedical Research
Centre at University College London
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK;
9Glasgow School of Art, Glasgow, UK;
10Beat, Norwich, UK; 11University College
London, London, UK; 12Psychiatric
Research Centre Ballerup, Ballerup, Denmark; 13EDIFY, London, UK
Correspondence to Ulrike Schmidt
(ulrike.schmidt@kcl.ac.uk)
First received 23 Jul 2022, final revision

### 1 Nov 2022, accepted 4 Nov 2022

© The Author(s), 2022. Published by
Cambridge University Press on behalf of
the Royal College of Psychiatrists. This is
an Open Access article, distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution licence (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits unrestricted re-use,
distributionandreproduction,providedthe
original article is properly cited. Summary
EDIFY (Eating Disorders: Delineating Illness and Recovery Trajectories to
Inform Personalised Prevention and Early Intervention in Young People) is an
ambitious research project aiming to revolutionise how eating disorders are
perceived, prevented and treated. Six integrated workstreams will address key
questions, including: What are young people’s experiences of eating disorders and
recovery? What are the unique and shared risk factors in diﬀerent groups? What
helps or hinders recovery? How do the brain and behaviour change from early- to
later-stage illness? How can we intervene earlier, quicker and in a more personalised
way? This 4-year project, involving over 1000 participants, integrates arts, design
and humanities with advanced neurobiological, psychosocial and bioinformatics
approaches. Young people with lived experience of eating disorders are at the
heart of EDIFY, serving as advisors and co-producers throughout. Ultimately, this
work will expand public and professional perceptions of eating disorders, uplift
under-represented voices and stimulate much-needed advances in policy and
practice. Keywords
Eating disorders; interdisciplinary working; prevention and early
intervention; youth engagement; risk and resilience. In Western countries, one in every six females and one in
twenty males develop an eating disorder.1,2 Prevalence and
burden of eating disorders are rising, with these disorders
developing earlier and hospital admissions increasing.1,3
Anorexia nervosa has the highest mortality of any mental
disorder; 1 in 2–3 people with bulimia nervosa or binge
eating disorder are obese or will become obese, with poten-
tial metabolic complications.1 Psychological comorbidities
are common and contribute to adverse outcomes.1 Peak
onset of eating disorders is in adolescence, a developmen-
tally sensitive time,1 giving eating disorders the power to
derail physical, cognitive, socioemotional and educational

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

development. Families and partners are also adversely
aﬀected. Estimates suggest a disease burden comparable to
that of anxiety and depression,4 yet a recent report by the
All-Party Parliamentary Group on eating disorders found
that between 2015 and 2019 only about 1% of UK research
funding went to eating disorders.5
Eating disorders have environmental and psychobio-
logical risk and maintaining factors. LGBTQIA+, culturally
and ethnically diverse young people and those with higher
body mass index (BMI) are particularly at risk for eating
disorders6,7 but less likely to be diagnosed or treated.8 An
understanding of how sociocultural factors (e.g. food inse-
curity, racial discrimination) interact with psychobiological
factors and comorbidities is lacking. Intervention within
about 3 years of eating disorder onset can improve out-
comes. Longer illness is associated with cognitive, behav-
ioural and neurobiological changes9 that adversely aﬀect
illness progression and treatment outcomes.9,10 Despite
this, the average duration of untreated illness is 2.9 years
for anorexia nervosa and 6.5 years for bulimia nervosa and
binge eating disorder.11
There have been no coordinated eﬀorts at eating
disorder prevention and early intervention. Under a quarter
of those with eating disorders in the UK receive treatment.1
Available interventions are only moderately eﬀective and not
tailored to illnessstageorindividual characteristics. Inrecogni-
tion of this, early intervention for eating disorders is now a UK
policy aim.12 From cancer to psychosis, early intervention and
stage models of illness have been the focus of research, leading
to more targeted treatments and better outcomes. Nothing
comparable exists in eating disorders. EDIFY aims to address
this gap. The EDIFY project
EDIFY (Eating Disorders: Delineating Illness and Recovery
Trajectories to Inform Personalised Prevention and Early
Intervention in Young People) is funded by UK Research
and Innovation (UKRI) under their Adolescence, Mental
Health
and
the
Developing
Mind
programme. This
programme supports ‘multi and inter-disciplinary research
and innovation that address areas of strategic importance
aligned with government policy and research priorities’ so
as ‘to better understand how and why mental health
problems emerge and what makes some young people
more susceptible or resilient than others’.13 Speciﬁcally, it
is recommended that creative arts and visual tools are
used ‘to both learn from and support young people’. This
knowledge will be used to generate evidence that can lead
to new approaches for improving adolescent mental health. EDIFY is a 4-year interdisciplinary programme of research
that addresses gaps in knowledge of eating disorder risk and
resilience,illnessandrecoverytrajectories,andtargetsforperso-
nalisedintervention. Bycombiningmultipleperspectives(young
people, families, other stakeholders) with cross-disciplinary
clinical and academic expertise, we aim to accelerate the depth,
quality and speed of knowledge generation in this area. Six integrated workstreams (WS1–WS6) will address a
range of questions, including: WS1: What are young people’s
experiences of developing an eating disorder, help-seeking
and recovery? What are the perspectives of diverse and high-
risk groups? WS2: What are the key social and psychobio-
logical risk and resilience factors in eating disorders and
how do these interact? What are the unique and shared
risk factors across groups? WS3: What helps/hinders recov-
ery in young people with eating disorders? WS4: How do eat-
ing disorder behaviours and brain responses change from
early- to late-stage illness? WS5: How can we intervene earl-
ier, quicker and in a more personalised way? WS6: How can
we co-produce outputs and share our ﬁndings with young
people, professionals and the public? In addition to knowledge generation, we anticipate a
number of outputs, all co-produced with young people,
including: a biopsychosocial model of eating disorder risk/
illness stages incorporating evidence of lived experience,
illness/recovery trajectories, characteristics of illness stages
and mechanisms driving transitions between them; proto-
cols and/or proof of concept of mechanism-focused inter-
ventions for young people with diﬀerent risk proﬁles/
illness stages; and resources and creative outputs to increase
public and professional understanding of eating disorders
and young people’s lived experiences of these conditions. The ﬁndings will be used to inﬂuence policy in this area. In this article, we describe our approach to youth
involvement and provide an overview of our programme. Research culture and values – towards genuine
co-production
An innovative aspect of EDIFY, and a core guiding principle,
is the involvement of young people throughout, from
research design through to knowledge dissemination, ensur-
ing that this work represents the insights and priorities of
those most aﬀected by eating disorders. Advisors with lived experience were involved from
EDIFY’s inception and made suggestions that shaped the
proposal to align with the needs of young people with eating
disorders. Throughout the project, each workstream will
have three designated young experts by experience, chosen
to reﬂect multiple perspectives and backgrounds. They will
work with EDIFY researchers on features such as study
design, development of study materials and knowledge
mobilisation. They will also form our youth advisory board
overseeing the project. To identify diverse youth advisors, we recruited via
national and local eating disorder charities (Beat, First
Steps ED), clinical eating disorder services, and Leaders
Unlocked, a specialist youth-involvement organisation. To
encourage
youth
engagement,
multi-method
creative
approaches will be used to facilitate experience sharing,
and emphasis will be placed on removing hierarchies of
power between researchers and young people. Our young
people’s panel varies in age, education and research familiar-
ity; therefore, we will provide individualised training and
support to empower each member. Relevant guidance will
be followed to ensure eﬀective co-production with young
people and inclusive working with diverse groups. In addition to remuneration for their time, beneﬁts to
young people will include the acquisition of leadership and
other transferrable skills (e.g. co-chairing meetings; presen-
tation skills); enhancing their critical ‘literacy’ through

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

debate; and having fun together as part of a community of
like-minded young people and within the wider EDIFY
group. Young people will also have the opportunity to obtain
co-authorship on papers, as well as references for college,
university or employers. In line with the funding objectives, EDIFY foregrounds
the voices of young people, but we are mindful of the import-
ance of families/carers in understanding and improving
treatments and care. With a range of other stakeholders,
families and carers are represented in a second advisory
board that interacts with the young people’s advisory board. An interdisciplinary programme of work
Our programme consists of six workstreams (Figs 1, 2) that
will be integrated and co-developed over time. In particular,
the arts-, design- and humanities-led workstreams (WS1 and
WS6) are cross-cutting, feeding into and drawing from, the
other workstreams throughout the programme. To facilitate
integration and learning, we will conduct scoping, systematic
or meta-analytic reviews on programme-wide topics (e.g.
eating disorders and developmental factors). In addition to
adhering to common measurements for mental health, we
will agree core measures across workstreams and replicate
existing protocols to allow cross-validation and harmonisa-
tion of data-sets within and outside EDIFY. To maximise
value, impact and integration, workstreams have multiple
points of synergy, including shared participants, shared
assessments and common conceptual foci, such as vulner-
ability to eating disorders, recovery and illness stage. WS1: Lived experience
This cross-cutting workstream aims to shed light on young
people’s experiences of help-seeking, treatment, transitions
and recovery, with a focus on diverse, under-represented
and high-risk groups. This will include young people from
diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds, LGBTQIA+ indivi-
duals, males, those with higher BMI, young people not in
education, employment or training (NEETs) and those
from low socioeconomic and rural backgrounds. As young
people may occupy multiple marginalised social identities,
an intersectional approach will be taken.14
Qualitative, design-led and arts-based methodologies
will be employed to co-create narrative accounts of illness
and recovery with young people. Data will be collected via
interviews, focus groups and workshops, as well as artistic
Fig. 1 This is a visual depiction of the six EDIFY workstreams (artwork by Dr Mariana Lopes). Each workstream feeds into the others to form a whole
picture, to be mobilised in workstream 6, in raising awareness and translating EDIFY ﬁndings to real-world policy and practice developments
to help young people with eating disorders.

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

outputs and existing sources such as social media posts, stor-
ies and music. Creative engagement throughout the process
will allow participants to ‘build’ and share their experience
such that it is meaningful to them, enabling visualisation
of their eating disorder journeys, identifying enablers and
barriers to help-seeking. This will allow collaboration and
identiﬁcation of shared illness and recovery features. For
example, during our ﬁrst WS1 meeting, a youth advisor
Fig. 2 A graphical representation of the ﬁve central scientiﬁc workstreams within EDIFY (artwork by Dr Mariana Lopes). This shows the methods
and techniques of each (in the balloons) and the connections they share. These connections are ﬂuid, to facilitate knowledge-sharing
between workstreams and keep the voice of young people with lived experience central. The sixth workstream is not included in this diagram
but is dedicated to knowledge mobilisation of ﬁndings from workstreams 1–5.

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

took visual notes, a unique combination of text and imagery
taken in real time on paper, which allows a more ﬂuent con-
nection between points raised than the more rigid structure
of writing (Fig. 3). Harnessing youth advisors’ knowledge,
skills and perspective, here by asking them to identify,
order and creatively convey key points of the discussion
for the whole group, is one example of our commitment to
co-production of knowledge with young people and to
embracing the new perspectives this presents. Creative projects undertaken previously by EDIFY inves-
tigators in collaboration with, for example, men and boys with
eating disorders will further shape our engagement. Examples
are Bartel’s ‘Hungry for Words’ project,15 including video
poems, photography, animations and rap music. Qualitative analysis will be used to synthesise data and
convey young people’s lived experiences of eating disorders
in academic papers. Animated ﬁlms, co-created with young people and Woven
Ink (a creative studio, working predominantly with the health
and
social
care
sector)
will
further
amplify
young
people’s voices and empower them to tell their stories. Figure 4 shows examples of our previous collaborations with
Woven Ink. WS1 has a reciprocal relationship with all other work-
streams, in that it feeds into and informs them, as well as
being responsive to learning from them, allowing the voices
of young people to shape clinical research. WS2: Risk and resilience
Research has documented increasing rates of appearance
concerns, dieting and eating disorders in young people in
the UK, with COVID-19 restrictions and increased reliance
on social media likely exacerbating this.16 Although some
young people with high-risk behaviours such as dieting will
develop an eating disorder, not all risk-exposed youth will. Little is known about which factors trigger eating disorder
onset, which may protect against it and whether risk
processes diﬀer in under-represented groups. WS2
will
use
a
minimum
of
seven
community
(IMAGEN
(imagen-project.org); EDGI
(edgiuk.org);
the
Avon
Longitudinal
Study
of
Parents
and
Children
(ALSPAC); the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS); the
Fig. 3 Visual notes taken at a workstream 1 meeting by one of the authors (T. S.).

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

(a)
(b)
Fig. 4 (a) Screenshot from the animation ‘Social Media, Food and Me’, produced by Woven Ink. The full animation can be seen at https://
freedfromed.co.uk/news-and-stories/37/social-media-food-and-me. (b) A still from the animation ‘Consider Eating Disorders in Men’,
produced by Woven Ink, artwork by Mathilde Laillet. The full animation can be seen on YouTube (search: ‘Consider Eating Disorders in Men’
at www.youtube.com).

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Millennium Cohort Study) or clinical (ESTRA;17 STRATIFY)
cohorts to develop and test predictive models of risk and
resilience for eating disorders and associated behaviours in
young people. Alongside existing research, this workstream
will identify key areas of priority based on ﬁndings from
WS1 (i.e. what young people aﬀected by eating disorders
report as being central to their development of eating diﬃcul-
ties). We will use several modelling approaches, including
machine learning methods, to determine biopsychosocial
markers of eating disorders and disentangle predictors from
correlates of illness. We will explore whether the same factors
predict onset of high-risk behaviours (e.g. appearance con-
cerns, dieting) versus progression from high-risk behaviours
to eating disorders, as well as how young people’s member-
ship of various or multiple marginalised groups inﬂuences
these models of risk. Use of multiple, complementary cohorts oﬀers the
opportunity to explore an array of potential predictors, span-
ning biological, psychological and social factors. Models can
be cross-validated between general population and clinical
samples, and the shared and unique risk factors across dif-
ferent contexts can be unpicked. WS3: Recovery
Recovery from an eating disorder is often conceptualised as
a process, but details are poorly understood. More under-
standing of the recovery process is needed to tailor interven-
tions to individuals’ needs. Remote measurement technology
(RMT) uses sensors within smartphones and wearable
devices to unobtrusively measure human behaviour and
physiology (passive RMT) or actively measure daily experi-
ences (active RMT). RMT can help elucidate the recovery
process by providing real-time multidimensional information
about patients’ clinical state, as well as potentially predicting
recovery or relapse. RMT has been used to investigate the tra-
jectories of other psychiatric illnesses,18 and a review into its
use in eating disorder populations has suggested that it should
be used in more naturalistic, everyday settings and for those
with bulimic-type eating disorders.19
We will prospectively recruit a cohort of 600 young
people: 480 with anorexia nervosa or bulimic-type eating
disorder (bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder) from the
network of FREED early intervention services in England,
and 120 healthy young people via social media and commu-
nity organisations. Participants will be provided with activity
monitors and android smartphones; data will be collected via
the RADAR-base platform (radar-base.org). Passive RMT will be assessed continually, gathering a
range of physiological and social data. Active RMT will be
collected every 2 weeks (eating disorder symptom, psycho-
logical and cognitive measures). An experience sampling
methodology (ESM) schedule will be delivered every 6
weeks to provide a more detailed understanding of eating
disorder symptom and mood changes and daily stressors. Measures of psychological and social impairment, as well
as genetic, neuroimaging and cognitive measures, will be
taken. Outcome measures will be completed at baseline
and at 3, 6 and 12 months. We will also evaluate user experi-
ence through qualitative interviews with selected young
people. WS4: Illness stages and progression
Neuroimaging, neurocognitive and behavioural studies indi-
cate that eating disorders change as the illness progresses,
becoming increasingly neurocognitively ingrained, and that
treatment response may become muted over time.9,10 For
example, research examining illness progression in anorexia
nervosa has shown that food choices become more dysfunc-
tional.20 General neurocognitive impairments also intensify
in those with longer duration of illness.21 However, these
studies tend to compare adolescents with adults, i.e. they
are confounded by developmental stage. Less is known
about eating disorders other than anorexia nervosa, which
we will attempt to remedy. This workstream will investigate behavioural and neural
diﬀerences between early- and later-stage eating disorders,
and which factors predict outcomes. We will use data from
the ESTRA cohort, as well as recruiting new participants,
both healthy individuals and those with early- or late-stage
eating disorders, including anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa. This will allow comparison of biopsychosocial and
cognitive proﬁles of young people with early- and late-stage
eating disorders, to examine changes over time, within and
across eating disorder diagnoses. A variety of demographic, personality, eating disorder
psychopathology, cognitive and neuroimaging data will be
collected. Statistical modelling techniques will be employed
to characterise eating disorder symptoms during illness pro-
gression and identify predictors of outcome. We will use net-
work analysis to conceptualise factors and their associations
to represent eating disorder psychopathology. To gain
mechanistic insights and reveal diﬀerences that characterise
eating disorder subgroups and illness progression, analyses
will include multiple comparisons: between healthy controls
and eating disorder subgroups, between patient groups with
diﬀerent illness durations, and between initial and follow-up
assessments. WS5: Prevention and early intervention
A large evidence base supports the use of universal, targeted
and indicated preventive psychological interventions in
young people, such as reducing body dissatisfaction.22
However, neurobiological risk factors (e.g. neurocognitive
markers of eating disorders) may also present an opportun-
ity for illness prevention, in eating disorders or transdiag-
nostically. Findings from WS2 and WS4 will be used to
co-design at least two novel intervention protocols for diﬀer-
ent illness or developmental stages, with the potential to
inform targeted, indicated and/or tertiary prevention of eat-
ing disorders. Findings from WS3 will also inform develop-
ment of a just-in-time adaptive intervention that can be
delivered via smartphone. Finally, a road map of promising
intervention targets will be created to catalyse future stud-
ies/work. Limited eﬃcacy of current eating disorder treatments1
indicates the need for tertiary prevention research, i.e. inter-
ventions aiming to facilitate recovery or reduce deterioration
when ﬁrst-line approaches have been unsuccessful. To
develop innovative treatments for young people with persist-
ent eating disorders, we will explore the use of non-invasive

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

neuromodulation in this group. This will be based on our
studies in adults with persistent anorexia nervosa where
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) has
promising clinical outcomes, with substantial improvements
in mood, quality of life, eating disorder symptoms and
BMI.23 This work also provided insight into likely mechan-
isms of action, namely, rTMS normalised gaze avoidance of
food stimuli, lessened excessive self-regulatory control over
food choices,20 and there was a signiﬁcant decrease in amyg-
dala cerebral blood ﬂow in the real rTMS group which corre-
lated with longer-term weight gain.24 The intervention was
highly acceptable to patients.25
We will use intermittent theta-burst stimulation (iTBS):
it is widely used for treating depression, produces similar
eﬀects to rTMS, is better tolerated and takes less time to
administer. Uptake, retention and acceptability will be
assessed, and treatment eﬀect sizes for mood and BMI will
be obtained, informing a larger future trial. We propose
that iTBS promotes neuroplasticity and changes the rela-
tionship
between
the
dorsolateral
prefrontal
cortex
(DLPFC) and amygdala. DLPFC stimulation may reduce
negative emotional responses to food cues in anorexia ner-
vosa via this mechanism, as suggested by the ﬁndings of
our adult trial.20
WS6: Knowledge mobilisation and transfer
In collaboration with young people and partner organisa-
tions, this cross-cutting workstream will focus on producing
a range of messages and activities tailored to diﬀerent audi-
ences, to raise awareness and stimulate change in policy and
practice. These will include infographics, data comics and an
EDIFY website (edifyresearch.co.uk) with resources for both
public and professional audiences, as well as training for
professionals. Findings will be disseminated in conferences,
educational settings and via social and traditional media. Impact will be evaluated in terms of reach, usefulness, use
and partnership indicators. Led by EDIFY ﬁndings and in
partnership with young people, we will commission three
arts-based projects aimed at raising awareness and spread-
ing knowledge. Links with diﬀerent artists with lived experi-
ence of eating disorders will facilitate diverse projects across
diﬀerent regions. Events and exhibitions will be held at the
Bethlem Museum of the Mind (Beckenham), the Science
Gallery London and the Glasgow School of Art. Conclusions
To produce eﬀective change, all aspects of eating disorders
must be investigated and tackled cohesively. This involves
a
rapprochement
and
interchange
between
arts
and
humanities on the one hand and psychiatry, psychology
and neuroscience on the other.26 Through adopting such a
transdisciplinary, holistic approach, EDIFY aims to trans-
form eating disorder detection, prevention, treatment and
services, with the potential for step change in policy and
practice for young people with eating disorders. Ultimately,
our ambition is that EDIFY’s research developments will
reshape the public and professional understanding of eating
disorders to be more informed, inclusive and hopeful. This is
a step towards redressing the lack of parity of esteem5 faced
by eating disorders and giving those aﬀected by these condi-
tions access to timely, inclusive and evidence-based care. About the authors
Amelia
Hemmings
is
a
research
assistant
in
the
Department
of
Psychological
Medicine, Institute
of
Psychiatry, Psychology
and
Neuroscience (IoPPN), King’s College London (KCL), UK. Helen Sharpe is
a senior lecturer in applied psychology at the School of Health in Social
Science, University of Edinburgh, UK. Karina Allen is a consultant clinical
psychologist and researcher with the Eating Disorder Service of South
London & Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Heike Bartel is
Professor of German Studies and Health Humanities in the Faculty of Arts
at the University of Nottingham, UK. Iain C. Campbell is a Senior
Research Fellow in the Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, KCL, UK. Sylvane Desrivières is Professor of Biological Psychiatry at the Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, IoPPN, KCL, UK. Richard
J. B. Dobson is Professor of Medical Informatics and lead for Bioinformatics
and mHealth for the Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre and King’s
College London, UK. Amos A. Folarin is the senior software development
group leader at King’s College London/National Institute for Health
Research Maudsley Biomedical Research Centre, UK. Tara French is a visit-
ing Research Fellow at Glasgow School of Art, UK. Jonathan Kelly is a policy
advisor at Beat, UK. Nadia Micali is an honorary senior lecturer at the Great
Ormond Street Hospital Institute of Child Health, UCL, and Head of Research
at the Mental Health Service of the Capital Region of Denmark, Denmark. Sneha Raman is a Research and Teaching Fellow in the Innovation School
at Glasgow School of Art, UK. Janet Treasure is Professor of Adult
Psychiatry in the Department of Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, KCL, UK. Ruby Abbas is a member of the EDIFY youth advisory board, working
with WS1, London, UK. Beck Heslop is a member of the EDIFY youth advis-
ory board, working with WS1, London, UK. Tallulah Street is a member of
the EDIFY youth advisory board, working with WS1, London, UK. Ulrike
Schmidt
is
Professor
of
Eating
Disorders
in
the
Department
of
Psychological Medicine, IoPPN, KCL, UK. Data availability
Data availability is not applicable to this article as no new data were created
or analysed in its preparation. Acknowledgement
We thank Dr Mariana Lopes for her artwork and invaluable help in creating
Figs 1 and 2. Author contributions
U. S. and H. S. developed the main conceptual ideas for the EDIFY pro-
gramme. A. H. wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. All authors provided
critical feedback and helped shape the research outline and the ﬁnal version
of the manuscript. Funding
This work is supported by the Medical Research Council/Arts and
Humanities Research Council/Economic and Social Research Council
Adolescence, Mental Health and the Developing Mind initiative as part of
the EDIFY programme (grant number MR/W002418/1). U. S., J. T. and
A. A. F. receive salary support from the National Institute of Health
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) at the South London
and Maudsley (SLaM) NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College London
(KCL). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not neces-
sarily those of the NHS, NIHR or Department of Health and Social Care. S. D.’s work is funded by the Medical Research Council and Medical
Research
Foundation
(grants
MR/R00465X/1
and
MRF-058-0004-
RG-DESRI; MR/S020306/1 and MRF-058-0009-RG-DESR-C0759). H. B.’s

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press

work on ‘Consider Eating Disorders in Men’ has been funded by the Arts and
Humanities Research Council and Wellcome. R. J. B. D. is supported by the
following: NIHR BRC at SLaM NHS Foundation Trust and King’s College
London, UK; Health Data Research UK, which is funded by the UK
Medical Research Council, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council, Economic and Social Research Council, Department of Health and
Social Care (England), Chief Scientist Oﬃce of the Scottish Government
Health and Social Care Directorates, Health and Social Care Research and
Development
Division
(Welsh
Government), Public
Health
Agency
(Northern Ireland), British Heart Foundation and Wellcome Trust; The
BigData@Heart
Consortium,
funded
by
the
Innovative
Medicines
Initiative-2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement No. 116074 (this
Joint Undertaking receives support from the European Union’s Horizon

research
and
innovation
programme
and
EFPIA);
the
NIHR
University College London Hospitals BRC; the UK Research and Innovation
London Medical Imaging & Artiﬁcial Intelligence Centre for Value Based
Healthcare; and the NIHR Applied Research Collaboration South London
(NIHR ARC South London) at King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust. Declaration of interest
None. References

Treasure J, Duarte TA, Schmidt U. Eating disorders. Lancet 2020; 395:
899–911. Limbers CA, Cohen LA, Gray BA. Eating disorders in adolescent and
young adult males: prevalence, diagnosis, and treatment strategies. Adolesc Health Med Ther 2018; 9: 111–6. Esposti M D, Ziauddeen H, Bowes L, Reeves A, Chekroud AM, Humphreys DK, et al. Trends in inpatient care for psychiatric disorders
in NHS hospitals across England, 1998/99–2019/20: an observational
time series analysis. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol 2021; 57): 1–4. Paxton SJ, Hay P, Touyz SW, Forbes D, Madden S, Girosi F, et al. Paying
the Price: The Economic and Social Impact of Eating Disorders in Australia. Deloitte Access Economics, 2012.

### 5 All-Party Parliamentary Group on Eating Disorders. Breaking the Cycle: An Inquiry into Eating Disorder Research Funding in the UK. Beat, 2021
(https://beat.contentﬁles.net/media/documents/APPG_Research_
Funding_inquiry_report.pdf). Cheng ZH, Perko VL, Fuller-Marashi L, Gau JM, Stice E. Ethnic diﬀer-
ences in eating disorder prevalence, risk factors, and predictive eﬀects
of risk factors among young women. Eat Behav 2019; 32: 23–30.

### 7 Diemer EW, Grant JD, Munn-ChernoﬀMA, Patterson DA, Duncan AE. Gender identity, sexual orientation, and eating-related pathology in a
national sample of college students. J Adolesc Health 2015; 57: 144–9. Waller G, Schmidt U, Treasure J, Emanuelli F, Alenya J, Crockett J, et al. Ethnic origins of patients attending specialist eating disorders services
in a multiethnic urban catchment area in the United Kingdom. Int J Eat
Disord 2009; 42: 459–63. Treasure J, Stein D, Maguire S. Has the time come for a staging model to
mapthecourseofeatingdisordersfromhighrisktosevereenduringillness? An examination of the evidence. Early Interv Psychiatry 2015; 9: 173–84.

### 10 Ambwani S, Cardi V, Albano G, Cao L, Crosby RD, Macdonald P, et al. A

multicenter audit of outpatient care for adult anorexia nervosa: symptom
trajectory, service use, and evidence in support of “early stage” versus
“severe and enduring” classiﬁcation. Int J Eat Disord 2020; 53: 1337–48.

### 11 Austin A, Flynn M, Richards K, Hodsoll J, Duarte TA, Robinson P, et al. Duration of untreated eating disorder and relationship to outcomes: a
systematic review of the literature. Eur Eat Disord Rev 2021; 29: 329–45.

### 12 NHS England. Guidance to Support the Introduction of Access and Waiting

Time Standards for Mental Health Services in 2015/16. NHS England, 2016.

### 13 UK Research and Innovation. £24 Million Investment into Adolescent

Mental Health. UKRI, 2021; 28 Jun (https://www.ukri.org/news/24-
million-investment-into-adolescent-mental-health/ [cited 29 Jun 2022]). Burke NL, Schaefer LM, Hazzard VM, Rodgers RF. Where identities
converge: the importance of intersectionality in eating disorders
research. Int J Eat Disord 2020; 53: 1605–9. University of Nottingham. Hungry for Words: Creative Approaches to Start
the Conversation about Eating Disorders in Men. University of Nottingham,
2022.
(https://www.nottingham.ac.uk/research/groups/hungry-for-
words/index.aspx [cited 29 Jun 2022]). Robertson M, Duﬀy F, Newman E, Bravo CP, Ates HH, Sharpe H. Exploring changes in body image, eating and exercise during the
COVID-19 lockdown: a UK survey. Appetite 2021; 159: 105062. King’s College London. ESTRA: Earlier detection and stratiﬁcation of eating
disorders and comorbid mental illnesses. KCL, 2022 (https://www.kcl.ac.
uk/research/estra [cited 22 Jul 2022]).

### 18 Melbye S, Kessing LV, Bardram JE, Faurholt-Jepsen M. Smartphone-

based self-monitoring, treatment, and automatically generated data in
children, adolescents, and young adults with psychiatric disorders:
systematic review. JMIR Ment Health 2020; 7(10): e17453. Presseller EK, Patarinski AG, Fan SC, Lampe EW, Juarascio AS. Sensor
technology in eating disorders research: a systematic review. Int J Eat
Disord 2022; 55: 573–624.

### 20 Dalton B, Foerde K, Bartholdy S, McClelland J, Kekic M, Grycuk L, et al. The eﬀect of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on food
choice-related self-control in patients with severe, enduring anorexia
nervosa. Int J Eat Disord 2020; 53: 1326–36.

### 21 Shott ME, Filoteo JV, Bhatnagar KA, Peak NJ, Hagman JO, Rockwell R,

et al. Cognitive set-shifting in anorexia nervosa. Eur Eat Disord Rev 2012;
20: 343–9. Chua JYX, Tam W, Shorey S. Research review: eﬀectiveness of univer-
sal eating disorder prevention interventions in improving body image
among children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Child
Psychol Psychiatry 2020; 61: 522–35.

### 23 Dalton B, Lewis YD, Bartholdy S, Kekic M, McClelland J, Campbell IC,

et al. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment in severe,
enduring anorexia nervosa: an open longer-term follow-up. Eur Eat
Disord Rev 2020; 28: 773–81. Dalton B, Maloney E, Rennalls SJ, Bartholdy S, Kekic M, McClelland J,
et al. A pilot study exploring the eﬀect of repetitive transcranial mag-
netic stimulation (rTMS) treatment on cerebral blood ﬂow and its rela-
tion to clinical outcomes in severe enduring anorexia nervosa. J Eat
Disord 2021; 9(1): 84. Dalton B, Austin A, Ching BC, Potterton R, McClelland J, Bartholdy S,
et al. ‘My dad was like “it’s your brain, what are you doing?”’: partici-
pant experiences of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation treat-
ment in severe enduring anorexia nervosa. Eur Eat Disord Rev 2022;
30: 237–49. Foreman D. Introducing the new culture section of BJPsych Bulletin. BJPsych Bull 2021; 45: 1–3.

## CULTURAL REFLECTIONS

Hemmings et al EDIFY
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjb.2022.83 Published online by Cambridge University Press
