# SN-JNSJ210835 416..434

**Year:** D:20

---

Behavioral/Cognitive
Distinct Representations of Tonotopy and Pitch in Human
Auditory Cortex
Emily J. Allen,1,2
Juraj Mesik,1 Kendrick N. Kay,2 and
Andrew J. Oxenham1
1Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, and 2Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, Department of
Radiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455
Frequency-to-place mapping, or tonotopy, is a fundamental organizing principle throughout the auditory system, from the
earliest stages of auditory processing in the cochlea to subcortical and cortical regions. Although cortical maps are referred
to as tonotopic, it is unclear whether they simply reflect a mapping of physical frequency inherited from the cochlea, a com-
putation of pitch based on the fundamental frequency, or a mixture of these two features. We used high-resolution functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to measure BOLD responses as male and female human participants listened to pure
tones that varied in frequency or complex tones that varied in either spectral content (brightness) or fundamental frequency
(pitch). Our results reveal evidence for pitch tuning in bilateral regions that partially overlap with the traditional tonotopic
maps of spectral content. In general, primary regions within Heschl’s gyri (HGs) exhibited more tuning to spectral content,
whereas areas surrounding HGs exhibited more tuning to pitch. Key words: auditory cortex; fMRI; frequency; pitch; timbre; tonotopy
Significance Statement
Tonotopy, an orderly mapping of frequency, is observed throughout the auditory system. However, it is not known whether
the tonotopy observed in the cortex simply reflects the frequency spectrum (as in the ear) or instead represents the higher-
level feature of fundamental frequency, or pitch. Using carefully controlled stimuli and high-resolution functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), we separated these features to study their cortical representations. Our results suggest that tono-
topy in primary cortical regions is driven predominantly by frequency, but also reveal evidence for tuning to pitch in regions
that partially overlap with the tonotopic gradients but extend into nonprimary cortical areas. In addition to resolving ambigu-
ities surrounding cortical tonotopy, our findings provide evidence that selectivity for pitch is distributed bilaterally through-
out auditory cortex. Introduction
A key organizing principle of the auditory system is tonotopy, an
orderly mapping of sound frequency to place. Tonotopy is estab-
lished in the cochlea, where different frequencies maximally dis-
place different locations along the basilar membrane, in a high-
to-low ordering from the base to the apex (Von Békésy, 1960). This tonotopic organization has been found at numerous stages
of the auditory pathways, up to and including auditory cortex
(Saenz and Langers, 2014; Thomas et al., 2015). Studies of corti-
cal mapping using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) have typically employed pure tones or narrowband noises
(Formisano et al., 2003; Talavage et al., 2004; Da Costa et al.,
2011; Striem-Amit et al., 2011; Saenz and Langers, 2014) in
much the same way as has historically been done to establish
tonotopy in earlier stages of the auditory processing hierarchy
(Von Békésy, 1960; Bourk et al., 1981; Nuttall and Dolan, 1996; Ruggero et al., 1997; Schreiner and Langner, 1997; Narayan et al.,
1998; Cooper, 1999). However, pure tones, narrowband stimuli,
and even many natural sounds, conflate two primary perceptual
attributes of sound: pitch height and timbral brightness. In
most sounds, pitch (i.e., the property defining melodies in
music) is determined by the fundamental frequency (F0),
whereas timbre (the perceptual property that distinguishes a
trumpet from a clarinet, even when they play the same note at
the same loudness), is affected by the spectral centroid (Fc) of
the sound’s energy distribution, with brightness increasing
with increasing Fc (Krumhansl and Iverson, 1992; Marozeau
et al., 2003; Allen and Oxenham, 2014). Because previous
Received May 5, 2021; revised Nov. 8, 2021; accepted Nov. 11, 2021. Author contributions: E. J. A. and A. J. O. designed research; E. J. A. and J. M. performed research; K. N. K.
contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; E. J. A., J. M., K. N. K., and A. J. O. analyzed data; E. J. A. wrote the
first draft of the paper; E. J. A., J. M., K. N. K., and A. J. O. edited the paper; E. J. A., J. M., K. N. K., and A. J. O. wrote
the paper. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant R01 DC005216. The Center for
Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR) is supported by NIH Grants P41 EB027061, P30 NS076408, and S10
RR026783 and by the W. M. Keck Foundation. We thank Anahita Mehta, Omer Faruk Gulban, Andrea Grant, Cheryl Olman, and Stephen Engel for helpful assistance, training, and advice. The authors declare no competing financial interests. Correspondence should be addressed to Emily J. Allen at prac0010@umn.edu.
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0960-21.2021
Copyright © 2022 the authors
416 • The Journal of Neuroscience, January 19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434

studies have used stimuli in which these two dimensions
covary, it remains unclear whether the spatial organization
observed in cortex simply reflects frequency-to-place map-
ping, inherited from the cochlear representation of spectral
content, or whether some or all portions of the cortical maps
instead reflect one or more higher-level features, such as pitch
and/or brightness. Although precisely localizing primary auditory regions in
human auditory cortex is an ongoing challenge (Moerel et al.,
2014), there is mounting evidence that the primary area A1 [esti-
mated to be within Heschl’s gyrus (HG)] shows a preference for
relatively simple acoustic features, whereas surrounding nonpri-
mary areas show greater sensitivity to complex stimuli, such as
speech and music (Norman-Haignere et al., 2015; de Heer et al.,
2017; Kell et al., 2018). Thus, it may be that the multiple gra-
dients identified in previous studies as multiple tonotopic maps
(Moerel et al., 2014; Saenz and Langers, 2014), reflect not just
different auditory fields, but also maps of different auditory
features. To distinguish between the mapping of Fc (timbral bright-
ness) and F0 (pitch) in cortical representations, we used high-re-
solution 7T fMRI to measure cortical responses to sequences of
pure tones that varied over a range of frequencies, and complex
tones that varied in either Fc or F0. We then used computational
models to characterize the spatial organization of responses to
each of these features. Our results replicate previously found
tonotopic maps produced by pure tones and find similar
responses to complex tones with a distinct spectral peak, consist-
ent with the organization found in the more peripheral auditory
pathways. However, our results also reveal new tuning to pitch
in bilateral regions that partially overlap with the tonotopic maps
but are located primarily outside HG. Overall, our findings reveal
the existence of spatially organized representations of both tono-
topy and pitch bilaterally within human auditory cortex. Materials and Methods
Participants
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) for human participant research at
the University of Minnesota approved the experimental procedures. Written and informed consent was obtained from each participant
before data collection. Ten members of the University of Minnesota
community [average (SD) age of 29.3 (4.2) years; six females, four
males], all right-handed and having normal hearing, defined as audio-
metric pure-tone thresholds of 20dB hearing level (HL) or better, at
octave frequencies between 250 Hz and 8 kHz, participated in this study. An eleventh participant was excluded after having great difficulty hear-
ing the stimuli and discovering elevated thresholds since their last audio-
gram, making them no longer eligible for participation. Stimuli
All stimuli were generated in MATLAB (The MathWorks) and pre-
sented using the Psychophysics Toolbox (Kleiner et al., 2007). Stimuli
were presented in three conditions: pure tones, complex pitch tones, and
complex timbre tones. The 13 pure tones, each a single frequency,
spanned six octaves (100–6400Hz), in half octave steps (Fig. 1A). The
complex pitch and timbre tones were bandpass filtered harmonic com-
plex tones (Fig. 1B). For all complex tones, the components started in
sine phase and were bandpass filtered with 12dB per octave slopes
around the center frequency (CF), and then lowpass filtered with a 16th
order filter and a cutoff frequency of 10kHz. The nine complex timbre
tones had a fixed F0 of 200 Hz and varied in the location of the bandpass
filter’s CF, spanning four octaves (400–6400Hz) in half octave steps
(Fig. 1C). The nine complex pitch tones had a fixed bandpass filter CF of
2400Hz and a varying F0, which spanned four octaves (100–1600Hz) in
half octave steps (Fig. 1D). The ranges for the pitch and timbre
conditions were chosen to ensure that the Fc was always well above the
F0, so that the peak of the spectral envelope (corresponding to the CF of
the bandpass filter) was always defined by the amplitudes of the
harmonics. Experimental design and task
Stimuli were presented via MRI-compatible Sensimetrics S14 foam tip
earbuds with custom filters to flatten the frequency response. Sound
attenuation with S14s is consistent with standard foam plugs. These ear-
phones, which are commonly used in auditory fMRI studies, have well-
documented distortion characteristics that are consistent across different
pairs of S14s (Norman-Haignere and McDermott, 2016). Because of the
broadband nature of the pitch and timbre stimuli, as well as the broad-
band masking provided by the continuous scanner noise (with the most
prominent peaks falling around 1 kHz), any subtle increases in ampli-
tude around certain harmonics caused by distortion products would
have a negligible contribution to the sound percept, which is largely
dominated by the stimulus itself. The stimuli were adjusted to be of equal perceptual loudness. This
was done through a multistep process. First, in a separate session from
the main experimental session, two participants, while wearing the S14
earphones, listened to repetitions of a single tone type, in blocks lasting
15 s. The scanner was not running during this session. Participants were
instructed to adjust the level of the tone by pressing button “1” on the
button box to decrease the level and button “2” to increase the level, until
it was clearly and comfortably audible. Once they were satisfied with the
level, the participants would press “3” to stay at that level for the remain-
der of the block. If they did not press “3,” they would automatically
advance to the next block at the end of the 15-s block. In each subse-
quent block, they were instructed to make the tone as loud as the tone
presented in the previous block. In these blocks, tones were ordered ran-
domly without replacement. The participants performed three repeti-
tions of this task, with the aim of making all the tones equal in loudness. We calculated the median level of the three trials for each tone. These
median levels for each tone were then increased by 25–30dB to account
for the presence of the scanner noise. Since equal loudness percepts
across frequencies tend to compress at higher levels (International
Organization for Standardization, 2003), the same participants then lis-
tened to the sounds while the scanner was running and continued to
make adjustments until all sounds were again of approximately equal
loudness over the scanner noise. These levels were further adjusted and
customized for each participant at the beginning of their respective ses-
sions, as needed, until all the tones were reported as being of roughly
equal loudness. The final equal loudness contours were similar across
participants, with only small offsets in the mean level required for com-
fortable audibility. The mean (SD) level was 83.4 (5.2) dB sound pressure
level (SPL) for the pure tones, 80.2 (3.9) dB SPL for the timbre tones,
and 75.3 (1.8) dB SPL for the pitch tones. We incorporated a “Morse code”-like rhythm into the stimuli to
enhance their perceptual salience over the sound of the MR pulse
sequence, inspired by the stimulus design of Thomas et al. (2015). Each
stimulus was presented with an equal number of short (50 ms) and long
(200ms) tone bursts, including 20-ms onset and offset ramps. Every
700 ms consisted of two short and two long tones, each followed by a 50-
ms gap, presented in random order. This process was repeated 11 times,
with random shuffling of the tones for each repetition, for a total stimu-
lus length of 7.7 s (Fig. 1G). All tones presented within the 7.7 s had an
identical F0 and Fc but varied in duration (50 or 200 ms). After a 700-ms
gap, a new stimulus was presented (with a new frequency, F0, or Fc,
depending on the condition) for 7.7 s, and so on, until all stimuli within
a given condition were presented once (i.e., one condition block) in a
random order, followed by a 12-s silent gap (Fig. 1F). There were 12 ex-
perimental runs (three pure-tone runs and nine complex-tone runs),
each about 6 min long (Fig. 1E). The order of the pure-tone and com-
plex-tone runs was counterbalanced across participants. Each pure-tone
run consisted of three pure-tone blocks and each complex-tone run con-
sisted of two pitch blocks and two timbre blocks, presented in a random
order. To avoid run-specific differences across conditions, both com-
plex-tone conditions were included within each run. Because of the well-
Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 417

established and robust nature of pure-tone tonotopy, most of the scan-
ning session was used to acquire data for the complex-tone conditions. Within a session, there were a total of nine trials for each pure-tone stim-
ulus and 18 trials for each of the pitch and timbre stimuli. Ten seconds
of silence was added to the beginning and end of each run. Participants
were instructed to keep very still and resist any desire to move to the
rhythm of the stimuli. For each 7.7-s stimulus, the participants’ task was
to indicate, via button box, whether the current stimulus was lower or
higher (in either pitch or timbral brightness) than the previous one. MRI
All data were acquired using Siemens scanners at the Center for
Magnetic Resonance Research (CMRR, University of Minnesota). Functional data were acquired at the passively shielded 7T Siemens
MAGNETOM scanner using a single transmit 32-channel Nova Medical
head coil. The acquisition parameters for the gradient-echo EPI
sequence used were: repetition time (TR) = 1400 ms; echo time (TE)= 20
ms, field-of-view (FOV) = 198 mm; matrix size 180  180; number of
slices = 44; 1.1-mm isotropic voxels; multiband factor= 2; generalized
autocalibrating partially parallel acquisition (GRAPPA) acceleration
factor= 3. Slices were angled to align with the Sylvian fissure of each par-
ticipant to fully encapsulate auditory cortices. The sound level of the
functional sequence at the center of the bore was 101 dBA before ear-
phone attenuation. Four fieldmaps were also collected throughout each
session for distortion correction. The acquisition parameters for the
fieldmaps were: TR= 190 ms; first TE= 4.08ms; second TE = 5.1 ms; 2.2
mm isotropic voxels; 22 slices. The complex-tone runs had 258 volumes,
and the pure-tone runs had 267 volumes. Pitch Tones (Fc=2400)
Timbre Tones (F0=200)
D
A
B
C
Level (dB SPL)
Level (dB SPL)
Level (dB SPL)
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency (kHz)
Frequency (kHz)
Pure Tones
Fc=800
0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

Fc=400

Fc=1131
Fc=1600
Fc=2262

Fc=3200
Fc=4525
Fc=6400
Fc=565

0.1

0.1

0.1

F0=100
F0=141
F0=200
F0=282
F0=400
F0=565
F0=800
F0=1131
F0=1600
0.1

F0
Frequency (kHz)
Fc
Amplitude
0.1

pitch
timbre
pure tones
silence
Conditions
Stimulus Sequence
Stimulus
Run #
E
G
F
Stimulus #
7.7s
~76s
~6 min
Figure 1. Stimulus and experimental session configurations. A, Frequencies of all 13 tones used in the pure-tone condition. B, Schematic diagram of harmonic complex tone manipulation. Shifts in the spectral envelope to the right or left (orange) correspond to increases or decreases in Fc, resulting in a higher (i.e., “brighter”) or lower (i.e., “duller”) timbre percept, respectively. Increases or decreases in the spacing between harmonics (yellow) correspond to increases or decreases in the F0 of the complex, resulting in a higher or lower pitch percept, respectively. All
stimuli were lowpass filtered at 10 kHz. C, Spectra of all nine complex tones used in the timbre condition (F0 fixed at 200 Hz). D, Spectra of all nine complex tones used in the pitch condition
(Fc fixed at 2400Hz). E, Counterbalanced order of conditions across all runs. F, Randomized order of stimuli within a condition block. G, “Morse code”-like rhythm of each stimulus.
418 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

Anatomical (T1 and T2-weighted) data were acquired at the Siemens
3T Prisma scanner with a 32-channel head coil. MPRAGE T1-weighted
parameters were: TR= 2400 ms; inversion time (TI)= 1000 ms; TE= 2.22ms; flip angle= 8°; 0.8-mm isotropic voxels. T2-weighted pa-
rameters were: TR= 3200 ms; TE= 563 ms; 0.8-mm isotropic voxels. Six
T1s and three T2s were acquired for each participant. Half of the participants used custom foam Caseforge head cases
(https://caseforge.com/). The posterior portion of each head case was
used to help stabilize participants’ heads during the scans and additional
padding was added under the neck and around the ears for further stabili-
zation and comfort. The remaining participants used standard MR-compat-
ible foam padding on the back of the head, along with additional neck and
ear padding. Anatomical and functional preprocessing
The data were preprocessed using a custom pipeline (Kay et al., 2019). Gradient unwarping, which corrects image distortions caused by of gra-
dient nonlinearities, was performed on the T1-weighted and T2-
weighted anatomical volumes using the gradient coefficient file provided
by Siemens. All six T1 volumes for a given participant were then coregis-
tered using rigid-body transformation with six degrees of freedom and
cubic interpolation. Once aligned, the volumes were averaged together
to improve contrast between the gray and white matter for high-quality
segmentation. The same process was used for the three T2 volumes. The
averaged T2 volume was then aligned to the averaged T1 volume for
each participant. Cortical reconstruction was performed via FreeSurfer (Fischl, 2012)
using the averaged T1 volume. Since the anatomical data had submillimeter
resolution, a “hires” flag was added, and an expert file was used to specify a
larger number of inflation iterations (50). Segmentation results were then
visually inspected in Freeview. The functional data were sampled across the
cortical thickness at 25%, 50%, and 75% cortical depths and then averaged
together. Note that while the analyses were performed on vertices in cortical
surface space, for simplicity, the term “voxel” will be used throughout. For
group-level surface maps, individual participant results were mapped to
FreeSurfer’s fsaverage cortical surface group space via nearest-neighbor
interpolation. Fsaverage is an anatomical surface template to which individ-
ual participants can be aligned via curvature-based alignment. Functional data preprocessing included slice time correction, fieldmap-
based undistortion, and motion correction. Functional data were aligned to
the anatomical data using an affine transformation. In the slice time correc-
tion step, the data were temporally upsampled from 1.4 to 1 s. In the motion
correction step, the data were sampled onto the FreeSurfer depth-dependent
surfaces. No smoothing was applied to the data. The GLMdenoise technique was used to process the
data and obtain a clean estimate of the BOLD response
related to the experimental conditions (Kay et al., 2013). The GLMdenoise toolbox is available at http://kendrickkay.
net/GLMdenoise/. The b weights were used to specify the
amplitude of the BOLD response to each stimulus and poly-
nomial regressors were used to specify the baseline response
in each run. Each 7.7-s stimulus was analyzed as a block,
and a canonical hemodynamic response function (HRF)
was assumed. Leave-one-run-out cross-validation was per-
formed and R2 was used to quantify the proportion of the
time-series variance (R2) that could be explained by the
stimuli across all conditions. The three pure-tone runs
(each containing three repetitions of each tone, totaling
nine repetitions of each pure tone across the scanning ses-
sion) were used to estimate three b weights per tone. Likewise, the nine complex-tone runs (each containing
two repetitions of each tone, totaling 18 repetitions of each
complex tone across the scanning session) were used to
estimate two b weights for each pitch and timbre tone. Statistical analysis
Encoding models
Encoding models were used to explore how similar or
dissimilar topographic representations of pure tones
were to the representations of complex tones varying either in their F0
or Fc. The first model implemented was the feature tuning model: Rf ¼ ge
ðfCFÞ2
ð2s2Þ

;
where responses (R) to a given feature (f) were modeled using a
Gaussian filter function described by three parameters: gain (g), CF, and
SD (s) of the Gaussian, where g relates to the height of the filter and s
relates to its bandwidth. While the architecture of this model was identi-
cal across conditions, the input into this model varied: for pure tones, a
single frequency value was the input for each of the pure-tone stimuli; a
single F0 value was the input for each of the pitch stimuli; and a single
Fc value was the input for each of the timbre stimuli. We assessed model performance using n-fold cross-validation, with
pure tones having 3 folds (two b weights per stimulus used for training,
one for testing), and pitch and timbre each having 2 folds (one b per
stimulus for training, one for testing), because of the number of b esti-
mates that came out of the general linear model (GLM) analysis. For
each fold, model R2 values were derived using the held-out data, by com-
puting the proportion of the original variance in the data that was unac-
counted for by the model fit and subtracting this quantity from 1:

## R2 ¼ 1 

Xn
i ðbi  ^bÞ

Xn
i ðbi  bÞ
2;
where b is the pattern of b weights across n stimuli in a given condition,
b is the mean across b estimates, and ^b are the predicted b s of the
model for the corresponding stimuli. Higher R2 values indicate more
accurate model predictions of the variability in b estimates across tones
within a given condition. Proportions of “tuned” voxels in a given region
of interest (ROI) were calculated by taking the total number of voxels in
a given condition with a model R2. 30%, divided by the total number
of tuned voxels (model R2. 30% for any condition). The second model implemented was the spectral tuning model,
which was inspired by the population receptive field (pRF) method
(Dumoulin and Wandell, 2008; Thomas et al., 2015). Instead of charac-
terizing responses to each stimulus on the basis of a single-valued stimu-
lus property, as was done for the feature tuning model, the spectral
tuning model took into account the entire frequency spectrum of each
stimulus. The form of this model is the same as Equation 1, except the
response RS depends on the full linear amplitude spectrum (S) of a given
stimulus, sampled at frequencies (f) up to 10kHz: Figure 2. Myelin density map and ROI. Average myelin density across cortical depths shown on an inflated
brain for one participant, thresholded at the 50th percentile (top), and the same myelin density map, but re-
stricted to the ROI within auditory cortex of the participant (bottom). HG denoted by white lines. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 419

L
R
>6400

<100
CF (Hz)
HG
STG
STG
STG
STG

## P P

A
A

## P P

A
A
HG
HG
HG
Group Average
S07
L
R
L
R
Figure 3. Tonotopy elicited by pure tones. Feature tuning model CF parameter maps for the pure-tone condition shown on inflated brains for one participant (top) and transformed to fsa-
verage space and averaged across all 10 participants (bottom) within the intersection of all participants’ ROIs. HGs denoted by white lines. White and black arrows indicate high (blue) and low
(red) frequency regions, respectively. L = left hemisphere, R = right hemisphere, A = anterior, P = posterior, HG = Heschl’s gyrus, STG = superior temporal gyrus. Figure 4. Feature maps reveal gradient reversals in all three dimensions. Unthresholded CF maps for the feature tuning model for three individual participants and averaged across all partic-
ipants (bottom right quadrant). Maps are shown on spherical cortical surfaces of the left and right hemispheres, respectively. Each row is the CF map for a given condition (pure tones, timbre,
and pitch, respectively). White and black arrows indicate high (blue) and low (red) frequency regions, respectively, in the pure-tone conditions. Arrows are shown in the same anatomical loca-
tions for the timbre and pitch conditions for ease of reference. Custom color maps span the respective CF range, on a log scale, of each condition, as labeled. L = left hemisphere, R = right
hemisphere. HGs denoted by white lines.
420 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

## RS ¼

X
f
ge
ðf CFÞ2
ð2s2Þ


 Sf

: While this model was the same as the feature tuning model for the
pure-tone stimuli, which were characterized as a single frequency in both
cases, it changed the input for the pitch and timbre stimuli, which are har-
monic complex tones containing many frequencies. Because the input fea-
ture for this model was the frequency spectrum of the stimuli, the same
model could be simultaneously applied to all conditions. However, to
more closely compare the results of the feature tuning model to the spec-
tral tuning model, this model was applied to each condition separately. ROIs
The ROIs for this study were the main tonotopic regions within and
around HG. The ROIs for each participant (one per hemisphere) were
manually defined based on several criteria: macroanatomical landmarks
of auditory cortices (identifying the HG for each participant,), myelin
density maps, and functional data (i.e., the GLM R2 maps and pure-tone tono-
topy results of the feature tuning model). The boundaries of HG were identified
by two independent raters with experience locating HG on the cortical surface,
and then cross-checked with the Destrieux atlas delineations in FreeSurfer
(aparc.a2009s). The myelin density observed in and around that region was
used to expand the ROI. These myelin density maps were generated by dividing
the averaged T1 by the aligned and averaged T2 of a given participant. Myelin
density was sampled across the cortical thickness at 25%, 50%, and 75% cortical
depths. These samples were then averaged together for a mapping of density
across cortical depths (Fig. 2). For all participants, these maps showed great-
est cortical myelin density in somatosensory, visual, and auditory regions,
consistent with earlier studies (Glasser and Van Essen, 2011). Since myelin
density maps are gradients lacking clear boundaries, minor adjustments
were made using the functional data to ensure that the ROIs were not too
conservative, so as to be omitting voxels with high R2 values or parts of
the main tonotopy gradients, but also not too liberal, so as to include an
excessive number of uninformative voxels. These ROIs were then used for
all surface plots for a given participant. Group-level ROIs were the inter-
section of all 10 participant’s ROIs in each hemisphere. For analyses involving the estimation of tuning properties within ver-
sus outside HG, the ROIs were divided into HG and non-HG sections. The HG ROI was manually drawn, based on the criteria described in the
previous paragraph. The non-HG ROI was created by excluding the HG
ROI from the original ROI. Figure 5. CF maps for each participant. Unthresholded CF maps for all 10 participants for the feature tuning model within their ROIs. Maps are shown on spherical cortical surfaces of the
left and right hemispheres, respectively. Each row is a participant. Each column is the CF maps for a given condition (pure tones, timbre, and pitch, representing frequency, CF, and fundamental
frequency, respectively). Custom color maps span the respective CF range, on a log scale, of each condition, as labeled. HGs denoted by white lines. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 421

Representational similarity analysis
In order to quantify the similarity of multivariate patterns of voxel activa-
tion elicited by different stimuli, representational similarity matrices
(RSMs) were computed. For each participant, the average pattern of
voxel-wise b estimates for each stimulus was computed within the two
ROIs (both hemispheres), and voxels with a GLM R2 of at least 10% (reflect-
ing robust stimulus-driven activation) were selected for use in this analysis. Subsequently, activation patterns for all stimulus pairs were used to com-
pute pairwise Pearson’s correlations, generating a matrix whose off-diagonal
elements reflect representational similarities between different pairs of stim-
uli. The group-level RSM was computed by averaging participant-level
RSMs across all 10 participants. Results
Behavioral results
Behavioral performance in judging whether the current stimulus
was higher or lower than the previous one (Fig. 1) was high
across all three conditions for all participants, suggesting that
they successfully attended to the stimuli. The average proportion
of correct responses was 96.8% (SD = 2.3%) in the pure-tone con-
dition, 93.1% (4.5%) in the timbre condition, and 95.8% (4.4%)
in the pitch condition. Because of near-ceiling performance in all
conditions, a nonparametric Friedman test was run to detect dif-
ferences in performance between conditions, which indicated a
significant main effect x 2(2) = 9.6, p = 0.008. Post hoc analysis
with a two-tailed Wilcoxon signed rank test was then conducted
to compare conditions. After a Bonferroni correction for multi-
ple comparisons, setting a to 0.017 (0.05/3), none of the paired
comparisons reached significance (pitch vs timbre: Z = 1.78,
p = 0.074; pitch vs pure tones: Z = 0.00, p = 1.00; timbre vs pure
tones: Z = 2.35, p = 0.019). Therefore, differences in cortical
representations between the three conditions are unlikely to be
because of differences in behavioral performance. Figure 6. Reliability of the CF estimates across cross-validation folds. CF maps for each model fit estimate for each condition are shown for two representative participants (top and bottom
figures, respectively). Custom color maps span the respective CF range, on a log scale, of each condition, as labeled. HGs denoted by white lines.
422 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

To verify that our pitch stimuli produced highly salient pitch
percepts, psychophysical tests were conducted (Moore et al., 1984). A two-alternative forced-choice adaptive staircase procedure was
used with a two-down one-up adaptive tracking rule that tracks the
70.7% correct point of the psychometric function (Levitt, 1971),
consistent with our earlier work (Allen and Oxenham, 2014). F0
difference limens (F0DLs) were measured on four participants
(three of whom participated in the main experiment) for six of the
complex pitch tones used in the main experiment (F0s: 100, 141,
200, 400, 800, and 1600). The resulting F0DLs were small (all below
1%). For reference, a semitone difference, the smallest interval used
in Western music, is around 6%. These results are in line with our
earlier measures of F0DLs for similar broadband harmonic tone
complexes (Allen and Oxenham, 2014), suggesting the salience was
high across the entire range of our pitch stimuli. Topographic mapping of both spectral content and
fundamental frequency
To assess the patterns of topographic cortical mapping for each
of the three conditions (pure tones, timbre, and pitch), we
Figure 7. Distribution of tuning BWs and relationship to tuning CFs. A, Unthresholded BW maps, defined as the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the fitted Gaussian (equivalent to
2.355 SD), for three individual participants for the feature tuning model within their ROIs. Maps are shown on spherical cortical surfaces of the left and right hemispheres, respectively. A low
number of octaves (reds) indicate a small BW, whereas a high number of octaves (blues) indicate a large BW, corresponding to sharper and broader tuning, respectively. HGs denoted by white
lines. B, Group-level scatterplots comparing BWs and CFs for the feature tuning model for the pure-tone condition. Voxels included for each of the 10 participants are those that exceeded the
feature tuning model R2 threshold of 30% and had BWs of eight octaves or less. Each participant’s data are shown in a different color. Fit lines for each participant’s data, as well as mean fit
lines (black) are plotted. To the left and bottom of the scatterplot are marginal kernel density histograms. Pearson’s r, slope of the line fit, and number of total voxels (n voxels) are reported. C, Group-level scatterplots comparing BWs and CFs for the timbre condition. Same plotting conventions are used as in B. D, Group-level scatterplots comparing BWs and CFs for the pitch condi-
tion. Same plotting conventions are used as in B, C. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 423

constructed a separate feature tuning model, where the GLM b
estimates for each voxel in the ROI in auditory cortices of each
participant were characterized as a Gaussian filter, with parame-
ters gain, g, CF, and s, applied to the respective stimulus feature
(frequency, Fc, or F0). Figure 3 shows the resulting filters’ CFs in
the
pure-tone
condition
on
a
cortical
surface
for
one
representative participant as well as the group average. Both indi-
vidual and group levels of analysis show robust high-low-
high tonotopic gradient reversals, in line with earlier studies
(Formisano et al., 2003; Langers and van Dijk, 2012; Thomas et
al., 2015), with a region of lower CFs (warmer colors) being ante-
riorly and posteriorly flanked by regions of higher CFs (cooler
colors), centered roughly on HG. At both the individual and
group levels, there are additional smaller clusters of low-CF and
high-CF voxels, also as reported in earlier studies (Da Costa et
al., 2011; Moerel et al., 2013). To determine whether the well-established tonotopic organi-
zation found with pure tones reflects spectral energy or F0 in
more complex sounds, we compared the pure-tone CF maps to
the CF maps in the timbre and pitch conditions. Since it can be
difficult to visualize the auditory cortices within the Sylvian fis-
sure on an inflated lateral surface, Figure 4 shows these maps on
spherical representations of the cortices for several representative
individual participants and the group average. As with the indi-
vidual participant maps, the group-level maps shown are
unsmoothed, though smoothed versions of these figures pro-
duced very similar results. Although the range of CFs (frequency, Fc, and F0) are different between conditions, because Fc must
always be higher than F0 (see Materials and Methods, Stimuli),
normalized color ranges were chosen to help visualize similarities
in the general pattern of tuning (i.e., highs and lows) across con-
ditions. We found the timbre maps to be broadly similar to the
pure-tone maps in terms of their high-low-high (blue-red-blue)
structure. The topographic organization in the pitch condition
seems less well defined, although a similar high-low-high gradi-
ent can be identified in both the individual and group-level data. The cortical locations of the high and low CF regions are reason-
ably similar for timbre and pitch, despite the fact that they are
derived from independent acoustic features, the spectral peak
and the F0, respectively. Maps for each of the 10 participants are
shown in Figure 5. While the pitch CF maps appear noisier than
those of the other conditions, the CF maps were highly consist-
ent across model fit estimates, as can be seen in Figure 6. Bandwidths (BWs) of the Gaussian filters were also estimated for
each condition (Fig. 7). For both the pure-tone and timbre condi-
tions, the narrowest BWs tend to be clustered centrally, around
Pure
Tones
Pure
Tones
Pure
Tones
Pure
Tones
Group Average
S07
S03
S09
R2
100%
< 0%
L
R
L
R
L
R
L
R
Pure
Tones
Timbre
Timbre
Pitch
Pure
Tones
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
Figure 8. Heat maps for explained variance are similar for pure-tone and timbre conditions. Cross-validated R2 heat maps for the feature tuning model for three participants and averaged
across all 10 participants (bottom right quadrant) on spherical cortical surfaces of the left and right hemispheres, respectively. Each row is a different condition. L = left hemisphere, R = right
hemisphere. HGs denoted by white lines.
424 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

HG, consistent with earlier reports using just pure tones (Thomas
et al., 2015). The distribution of BWs for the pitch condition is
again less clear-cut, although some participants show some indica-
tion of a central region with sharper tuning. To better understand which regions in auditory cortex are
driven by each condition, Figure 8 shows the variance accounted
for (R2) of the held-out data in the b weights by each voxel’s fil-
ter in each of the three conditions. As with the model CF and
BW parameters, the spatial distribution of the high R2 voxels is
similar in the pure-tone and timbre conditions. In the pitch con-
dition, the number of voxels with a substantial amount of var-
iance explained is reduced, with the exception of regions around
the border of HG. While there appears to be some interindivid-
ual variability in the spatial patterns of high R2 voxels, the group
average results show a small cluster of higher R2 values lining the
anterolateral side of HG, bilaterally (Fig. 8, lower right). This
location is consistent with previous studies’ reports of the loca-
tion of pitch-sensitive regions in both humans (Penagos et al.,
2004; Norman-Haignere et al., 2013) and nonhuman primates
(Bendor and Wang, 2006). However, because of the anatomical
variability across individuals seen both in the present study and
reported in earlier work (Rademacher et al., 2001), group-level
maps have somewhat limited value and should be considered in
conjunction with cortical representations from individual partic-
ipants. R2 heat maps for each participant and comparisons of
data with feature tuning model fits can be seen in Figures 9 and
10, respectively. Pure-tone cortical tonotopy primarily reflects spectral content
The analysis shown in Figures 3 and 4 for each condition sepa-
rately indicates strong similarities between the pure-tone and
timbre conditions, suggesting that traditional pure-tone cortical
tonotopy primarily reflects a sound’s spectral content, rather
than its pitch. To provide a more direct comparison of the corti-
cal responses for different conditions, we calculated RSMs both
within and across conditions (Fig. 11). Each matrix cell shows
the correlation coefficient between voxels’ responses for a given
pair of stimuli (in terms of F, Fc, or F0) within the same ROIs as
shown in the surface maps. High correlations in cells near the
main diagonal, as seen in the within-condition comparisons for
Figure 9. Maps of variance explained for each participant. Cross-validated heat maps showing R2 values for the feature tuning model for all 10 participants for the feature tuning model on
spherical cortical surfaces of the left and right hemispheres, respectively. Each row is a participant. Each column is the R2 maps for a given condition (pure tones, timbre, and pitch, respectively). HGs denoted by white lines. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 425

both pure-tone and timbre conditions (top-left and center boxes
in each panel), indicate that tones that are closer in frequency (or
Fc or F0) produce activation patterns that are more strongly cor-
related across voxels than tones that are distant in frequency. A similar diagonal correlation pattern can be seen when compar-
ing patterns of activation between the pure-tone and timbre
conditions (left-middle box), suggesting that voxels are
responding to similar features in both conditions. In con-
trast, within-condition comparisons for the pitch condition
(bottom right box) show higher correlations across all tones,
and the RSMs comparing pitch and pure-tone conditions
and comparing pitch and timbre conditions (bottom-left and
bottom-middle boxes) show similarly high correlations for
all higher frequencies (or Fc), independent of F0. This is
likely driven by the relatively high Fc (2400 Hz) of all pitch
stimuli. Overall, the RSM analysis confirms our initial analy-
sis showing that classic tonotopy likely reflects the spectral
content, and not the F0, of complex tones. Shared and distinct tuning properties
To determine whether tuning to the different dimensions was
anatomically distinct, we investigated voxels demonstrating clear
tuning to one or more conditions. We did this by categorizing
each voxel as being selective along a certain dimension if the fitted
Gaussian function for that voxel accounted for at least 30% of the
variance in that condition. We did this for each of the three con-
ditions (pure tones, pitch, and timbre), resulting in each voxel
being categorized independently as selective (or not) along each
of the three dimensions. Figure 12A provides a surface plot for
one participant, with voxels color-coded to indicate the condition
(s) under which each voxel was categorized as selective. In general, a large proportion of voxels jointly tuned to pure
tones and timbre, as well as many voxels tuned specifically to
timbre, are centered on HG. Beyond HG, while all combinations
of tuning are represented in regions posterior to HG, there are
prominent clusters of voxels in regions anterior to HG in both
hemispheres, tuned either to both pure tones and pitch or just to
pitch, in line with previously postulated pitch-sensitive regions
(Patterson et al., 2002; Penagos et al., 2004; Norman-Haignere et
al., 2013). Along with the surface plots in Figure 12A is a Venn
diagram showing the proportions of voxels with each type of
tuning for the same sample participant. The Venn diagram for
the group-average data is shown in Figure 12B, along with
examples of the data and model fits from individual voxels
that provide examples of selectivity along one, two, or all three
dimensions. Surface plots and Venn diagrams for each participant
Pure tones
Timbre
Pitch
Data
Fit
F (Hz)
Fc (Hz)
F0 (Hz)
100 400 1.6k 6.4k100 400 1.6k 6.4k

400 1.6k6.4k 400 1.6k 6.4k 100 400 1.6k100 400 1.6k
Normalized response
Data
Fit
Fit
Data

Voxel

S03
S07
S08
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S0
S08
S09
Voxel

Group Level
Figure 10. Comparison of data and feature tuning model fits. Each pair of panels shows the tuning of individual voxels (left) and the predicted tuning of the corresponding model voxel
(right) for the voxels with the highest R2 values, ordered from top to bottom based on the fitted CF (from low to high). The three columns show data from the pure-tone, timbre, and pitch
conditions, respectively. Each row shows data from an individual participant, taking the top 1000 voxels from each. The bottom row shows the data pooled across participants, taking only the
top 2000 voxels (i.e., voxels with the highest R2 values). For visualization purposes, each fit was normalized (0–1 range) and the same scaling constants were applied to that voxel’s data. The
data show a generally good correspondence between the predicted and actual tuning.
426 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

can be found in Figure 13. The relative proportions shown in these
Venn diagrams remain similar for a range of R2 thresholds and
are not specific to the selected 30% threshold. Visual inspection of
the surface maps for each participant for cross-validation fold 1
versus fold 2 showed a high degree of consistency, and paired-
sample t tests comparing the proportions within each of the
seven sections of the Venn diagram across all 10 participants
found no significant differences (p, 0.05) for any of the
across-fold comparisons. A simulation was also run to deter-
mine the amount of overlap that would be expected by chance,
assuming the tuning for each condition was distributed inde-
pendently. In all cases, with the exception of the overlap between
pitch and timbre, the overlap found in the present study exceeded
the amount of overlap that could be ascribed to chance. Overall, the greatest proportion of voxels are tuned to just the
timbre of complex tones, followed by voxels jointly tuned to tim-
bre and pure tones. Thus, over 70% of voxels are tuned to some
aspect of spectral content (F, Fc, or both), with a relative lack of
tuning to F0. The fact that many voxels appear to have selectivity
for the spectral content of complex tones but not for the pure
tones is consistent with findings from single-unit studies that
have reported the existence of many cortical neurons that
respond more strongly to spectrally com-
plex
sounds
than
to
pure
tones
(Rauschecker et al., 1995; Bendor and
Wang, 2005; Feng and Wang, 2017). Nevertheless, over 20% of voxels appear
to exhibit tuning to pure-tone frequency
without showing similar selectivity for
the overall spectral shape of complex
sounds. Although the population appears to
be dominated by voxels with spectral
content selectivity, the resulting Venn
diagrams are consistent with our other
measures (e.g., Fig. 8) in showing a sub-
stantial proportion of voxels, approach-
ing 30%, that appear to have F0 tuning,
either exclusively or in combination with
tuning to other dimensions. Similarities in cortical tuning
properties for pure-tone frequency,
timbre, and pitch
Although the timbre response patterns,
reflecting
spectral
content,
seem
to
resemble pure-tone tonotopy (Fig. 11),
and show the greatest degree of overlap
in the Venn diagrams (Figs. 12, 13, pur-
ple section), some similarities were also
observed between the pure-tone and
pitch conditions, reflecting sensitivity to
F0, as well as some overlap in the Venn
diagrams (Figs. 12, 13, green section). Here, we provide a quantitative assess-
ment of these similarities by comparing
the model’s CFs obtained in the different
conditions for individual voxels. Figure 14
shows scatterplots of voxels that demon-
strated tuning (i.e., selectivity along the
dimension being tested) for both pure
tones and timbre (Fig. 14A) or for both
pure tones and pitch (Fig. 14B). As
expected, there was a strong relationship
between voxel CFs derived in the pure-tone condition and the CFs
for the same voxels derived in the timbre condition (r=0.89) with
an average relationship close to unity. Interestingly, although there were fewer voxels that were respon-
sive to both pure-tone and pitch conditions, the correlation between
the CFs for those voxels was similarly high (r=0.79). This finding
suggests that voxels tuned to both pitch and pure tones often have a
best frequency corresponding to the best F0. Finally, the kernel den-
sity histograms indicate a broad peak of voxels with CFs (in terms
of F, Fc, and F0) around 800Hz, suggesting a somewhat nonuni-
form distribution of CFs across all three dimensions. Pitch tuning in auditory cortex
Although the primary cortical tonotopic gradients seem to be
dominated by spectral content, as shown by the close correspondence
between responses in the pure-tone and timbre conditions, evidence
for tuning to F0 or pitch was also observed in all participants. Voxels
from one participant showing tuning to low, medium, and high F0s
are shown in Figure 15A. To further explore the spatial layout of F0
tuning, we examined pitch-tuned voxels that were not sensitive to
changes in either the pure-tone or timbre conditions (i.e., Figs. 12, Figure 11. Patterns of activation are more similar for pure-tones and timbre conditions. RSMs within the ROIs of three par-
ticipants, averaged across repeats for a given stimulus, thresholded to include voxels with a GLM R2 of at least 10% (i.e., voxels
that show robust sound-evoked responses). The bottom right quadrant shows RSMs thresholded at a GLM R2 of 10% for each
participant and then averaged across all 10 participants. White spaces indicate pure-tone frequencies that do not have corre-
sponding Fc or F0 values for the timbre and pitch conditions, respectively. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 427

13, yellow section of Venn diagrams). Figure 15B shows voxels
pooled across all participants with an R2 threshold of 0% (since
model fit is evaluated on held-out data, the variance of the residuals
can exceed that of the data, i.e., R2, 0%), and a second, more strin-
gent, map with an R2 threshold of 30%. These results suggest there
may be some organization to these exclusively pitch-tuned voxels
that is relatively insensitive to the R2 cutoff used in the analysis. There is a trend for a high-low-high F0 organization around the
edges of HG, as denoted by the white and black arrows. The impression that F0-tuned voxels were more likely to be
found in nonprimary auditory cortex than frequency-tuned or
Fc-tuned voxels was tested quantitatively by comparing the pro-
portions of tuned voxels within each participant’s ROI that were
inside HG (the macroanatomical landmark associated with the
“core” or primary auditory cortex, based on histologic methods; Wallace et al., 2002), versus outside HG. A two-tailed paired-
samples t test revealed a significant increase in the proportion
of pitch-tuned voxels (i.e., Figs. 12, 13, yellow section of Venn
diagrams) outside of HG compared with inside HG (mean
proportion of pitch voxels within HG= 11.59%; mean propor-
tion of pitch voxels outside of HG= 18.36%; p, 0.01), mirrored
by a proportional decrease in voxels tuned to spectral content
(i.e., all other sections of the Venn diagrams, excluding yellow)
outside of HG compared with inside HG (mean proportion of
spectral voxels within HG = 88.41%; mean proportion of spectral
voxels outside of HG = 81.64%; p, 0.01). Although the precise
locus of A1 remains debated and is subject to large interindi-
vidual variability (Moerel et al., 2014), the fact that F0-tuning
is found more outside than inside HG is consistent with
pitch being represented more in higher-level cortical regions
relative to spectral processing. Critically, the voxels demonstrating clear F0 tuning (R2.
30%) are distributed throughout auditory cortex, bilaterally, and
are not located in an isolated region or limited to one hemi-
sphere. There was no significant difference in the number of vox-
els per hemisphere across participants that were selective for F0
(p = 0.58). This broad distribution of pitch tuning, which has also
been found in macaques (Kikuchi et al., 2019), may help explain
34%
16%
20%

17%
pitch
timbre
pure
tones
pure tones &
timbre
pure tones
& pitch
timbre
& pitch
ALL
S07
Group Average
Pure tones
Timbre
Pitch
Pure tones
Timbre
Pitch
Beta (% sig. change)
-4

17%
16%
32%

24%

-2
-1

Data 1
Data 2
Data 3
Mean model fit

F (Hz)
Fc (Hz)
F0 (Hz)
F (Hz)
Fc (Hz)
F0 (Hz)
F (Hz)
Fc (Hz)
F0 (Hz)

-2

Pure tones
Timbre
Pitch
-6
-4
-2

A
B
Figure 12. Percentage of voxels showing joint tuning. A, Surface map (top) for one participant showing voxels with a model R2 of at least 30% for one or more features within the feature
tuning model. Different colors denote conditions that meet this threshold, indicating which voxels are demonstrating tuning across multiple conditions. HGs denoted by black lines. Arrows point
to the regions anterior to HG predominantly tuned to pitch (or pitch and pure tones). In the center is a Venn diagram for this participant showing the percentage of voxels with and without
joint tuning, also only including voxels with a model R2 of at least 30%. B, Seven voxels showing various types of tuning. The three plots in each row show tuning of a single voxel to each of
the conditions. The colored lines are the b estimates for each stimulus type, ordered from low to high along the x-axis. The black line is the average feature tuning model fit. Boxes filled
with gray indicate poor tuning (feature tuning model R2 was 15% or less in all cases) for that condition. The colors of the box outlines correspond to the colors in the Venn diagram. Normalized data from each participant’s individual Venn diagram was averaged together to derive the mean proportions. See legend at the bottom for a description of the color map.
428 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

why it has proved difficult to build a consensus on the presence
or location of a “pitch center” in auditory cortex (Hall and
Plack, 2009; Bendor, 2012). In addition, there appears to be a region along the STG that is
tuned predominantly to low F0s, as indicated by the rectangles in
Figure 15B This area has been identified as a pitch-sensitive
region, in addition to the region anterolateral to HG, which con-
tains a large cluster of high F0-tuned voxels (e.g., Patterson et al.,
2002; Penagos et al., 2004; Norman-Haignere et al., 2013). However, it is important to note that pitch
sensitivity (i.e., stronger cortical responses
to sounds with greater pitch salience),
found in previous studies, is distinct from
representations of pitch selectivity (i.e.,
tuning to specific F0s) that we demonstrate
here. Spectral tuning model
To further support the claim that the to-
pography shown in Figure 15 is a reflec-
tion
of
F0
tuning
and
cannot
be
explained by the subtle differences in
spectral fine structure that occur with
changes in F0, we employed a spectral
tuning model. In this model, instead of
using the spectral peak as the input for
the timbre condition, and F0 as the input
for the pitch condition, the Gaussian
weighting function was applied to the
full sound spectrum and was fitted sepa-
rately to each of the three conditions. Performance for the pure-tone condition
was the same as in the feature tuning
model (as the input for both models is
the frequency of the pure tone) and per-
formance for the timbre condition was
very similar in both models. However, as
expected, given the lack of change in
spectral envelope across the range of F0
values tested, this model explained virtu-
ally no variance for the pitch conditions
and predicted essentially a flat line across
all stimuli in the pitch condition (Fig.
16). Changing the color range for pitch
to be around the Fc of the stimuli did not
improve these CF maps. The fact that the
spectral tuning model could account for
the observed responses in the pure-tone
and timbre conditions, but not in the
pitch condition, further supports the
claim that the tonotopy observed in stud-
ies using pure tones is predominantly
driven by spectral content. Relationship between F0 and spectral
density
Although our results are consistent with
F0 selectivity, it is important to note that
increases in F0 are inversely correlated
with spectral density, or spacing between
neighboring spectral components. Thus,
it is, in principle, possible that voxels that
appear to be tuned to F0 are instead
tuned to different degrees of spectral
density. We addressed this potential con-
found by using our pure-tone and timbre data, noting that pure
tones are spectrally less dense than complex tones. Specifically, if
spectral density were determining the responses in our F0-tuned
voxels, voxels tuned to high F0s (i.e., potentially reflecting tuning
to lower spectral density) should respond more strongly to pure
tones than to timbre tones with the same CF. In contrast, voxels
tuned to low F0s (i.e., potentially reflecting tuning to higher
Figure 13. Joint tuning surface plots and Venn diagrams for each participant. Surface maps for each participant showing
voxels with a model R2 of at least 30% for one or more features within the feature tuning model. The adjacent Venn diagrams
show the proportion of voxels exhibiting tuning to one or more features, also only including voxels with a model R2 of at least
30%. See legend for a description of the color map. HGs denoted by black lines. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 429

spectral density) should then respond
more strongly to the timbre tones, which
are spectrally dense. To test this predic-
tion,
we
calculated
the
difference
between the mean pure-tone and mean
timbre responses in each F0-tuned voxel,
defined as an F0 model fit exceeding R2
of 30%, and plotted this difference as a
function of the voxels’ best F0 (Fig. 17A). If
the
apparent
F0
tuning
instead
reflected a tuning to spectral density,
then the relative response to pure tones
over timbre tones should increase as a
function of best F0, leading to a positive
slope. In fact, we found no relationship
between best F0 and the difference in
mean response to pure tones and timbre
tones (mean slope = 0.00, 95% confidence
interval (CI) = [0.16,0.06]). This out-
come is consistent with responses driven
by F0, rather than spectral density. To
confirm these voxels' selectivity for F0,
we analyzed their responses using the
same approach that was used to rule
out their selectivity for spectral density. Specifically, we subtracted the mean b
response to the lowest pitch stimulus
(F0=100Hz) from the mean b response
to
the
highest
pitch
stimulus
(F0=
1600Hz). The positive slope in Figure
17B
(mean
slope=1.13,
95%
CI
=
[0.92,1.19])
indicates
an
increased
preference for higher pitch stimuli as a
function of pitch CF preference, thus
confirming
their
selectivity
for
F0. While more research is needed expressly
controlling for effects of spectral density,
the present findings are consistent with
the findings of Penagos et al. (2004), in
which they reported no difference in acti-
vation maps when contrasting responses
to spectrally sparse from spectrally dense
harmonic tones, so long as both evoked a
similar degree of pitch salience. The argu-
ment in favor of F0 tuning, as opposed to
spectral-density tuning, is further bol-
stered by the scatterplot in Figure 14B,
which shows a good correspondence
between the best frequencies and best F0s
for voxels tuned to both pure-tone frequency and F0. Discussion
This fMRI study used complex tones to dissociate the auditory
cortical representations of F0 (which determines pitch) from
spectral content (which influences timbre) to determine which of
these underlies the well-known tonotopic organization observed
with pure tones. Consistent with previous pure-tone studies
(Formisano et al., 2003; Da Costa et al., 2011; Striem-Amit et al.,
2011; Saenz and Langers, 2014; Thomas et al., 2015), we found
bilateral V-shaped high-low-high gradient reversals overlapping
HG in all participants, with narrower tuning BWs around HG
and broader tuning BWs in surrounding regions. Although the
alignment across participants is complicated by individual
differences in size, shape, and number of HG in each hemisphere
(Rademacher et al., 2001), this high-low-high pattern of tonotopy
was preserved at the group level (Fig. 3). A similar high-low-high pattern was found with harmonic
complex tones that maintained a constant F0 but varied system-
atically in their spectral peak or Fc, resulting in changes in timbre
along a dull-bright continuum (Fig. 4). The similarity of the
pure-tone frequency and complex-tone Fc representations both
within and beyond HG suggest that the tonotopy observed in
earlier studies was driven primarily by spectral content. However, the fact that many voxels exhibited selectivity for spec-
tral content specifically in complex tones but not pure tones and
vice versa (Figs. 12, 13) suggests an organization more complex
than the simple filtering found in the cochlea. Most strikingly,
we found evidence of an orderly representation of pitch-tuned

F (Hz)
Pure tone CF
Probability density
Probability density
F (Hz)
Pure tone CF

Timbre CF
Probability density
Probability density
Fc (Hz)

F0 (Hz)
Pitch CF
r = 0.89
slope = 0.83
n voxels = 3256
r = 0.79
slope = 0.82
n voxels = 1265
A
B
Figure 14. Auditory cortical voxels show similar tuning CFs between features. A, Scatterplots comparing CFs for the feature
tuning model for timbre and pure-tone conditions. Voxels included for each participant are the intersection of those that
exceeded the feature tuning model R2 threshold of 30% for each condition being plotted. Axis ranges are limited to CFs that
were included in both conditions. Each participant’s data are a different color. Fit lines for each participant’s data, as well as
mean fit lines (black) are plotted. To the left and bottom of each scatterplot are marginal kernel density histograms as well as
a mean kernel density line (black). Pearson’s r, slope of the line fit, and number of total voxels (n voxels) are reported. B, Scatterplots comparing CFs for the feature tuning model for pitch and pure-tone conditions. Same plotting conventions as in A.
430 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

voxels, particularly in regions surrounding HG, when examining
responses to complex stimuli with a fixed spectral peak but vary-
ing in F0 (Figs. 4, 5, 15). Relationship to previous studies
In addition to the pure tones commonly used to reveal robust
cortical tonotopy, complex natural sounds, such as speech, musi-
cal instruments, and animal vocalizations, have been used to
derive feature representations in auditory cortex using fMRI
(Moerel et al., 2012; De Angelis et al., 2018). However, as with
pure tones, the positive correlation between F0 and spectral
energy often found in natural sounds (Assmann and Nearey,
2008; Hillenbrand and Clark, 2009; McAdams, 2013) makes it
difficult to conclude whether the derived maps reflect spectral
energy distributions, F0, or a combination of the two. The pres-
ent study resolves this issue by independently varying F0 and Fc
to tease apart the cortical topography of these features. Early MEG studies using complex tones attempted to study
the relationship between pitch and sound spectra. Their differing
conclusions suggest either that cortical tonotopy reflects pitch
(Pantev et al., 1989), or that it reflects orthogonal representations
of both pitch and spectral distribution (Langner et al., 1997). However, the limited spatial resolution of MEG makes it poorly
suited to fine-grained analysis of the topographical organization
of cortical representations. The present study used high-field
fMRI to explore the topography of these features at a much
higher spatial resolution. Lastly, several studies have used fMRI in an effort to identify
regions of human auditory cortex that respond preferentially to
pitch-eliciting stimuli (Penagos et al., 2004; Hall and Plack, 2009; Norman-Haignere et al., 2013; De Angelis et al., 2018). While their
focus was on finding regions exhibiting categorical pitch sensitiv-
ity, the present study extends this work by treating pitch (F0) as a
continuous variable and dissociating F0 selectivity from frequency
selectivity (tonotopy). Our results reveal voxel-wise tuning to dif-
ferent ranges of F0, in regions surrounding HG, that is distinct
from tonotopy. As such, our work provides a unique and comple-
mentary perspective on F0 encoding in human auditory cortex. Voxel tuning across multiple dimensions
A considerable proportion of voxels exhibited tuning in two or
more of the conditions tested, particularly in the pure-tone and

F0 (Hz)

Group Pooled
L
R
Pitch CF Only

## R2 > 0%

Pitch CF Only

## R2 > 30%

F0 (Hz)

Beta (% sig. change)
Low Pitch
Data 1
Data 2
Mean model fit

F0 (Hz)

Medium Pitch

F0 (Hz)

High Pitch
B
A
Figure 15. Voxels showing clear pitch tuning. A, Three different voxels for one participant tuned to low, medium, and high pitches, respectively. The blue and red lines are the b estimates,
and the black line is the average feature tuning model fit. B, Voxels pooled across all participants with feature tuning model R2 in the pitch condition of.0% (top) and.30% (bottom) and
excluding voxels with corresponding thresholds in the other two conditions (pure tone, timbre). For voxels in common across participants, the pitch CFs are averaged. White and black arrows
indicate high (blue) and low (red) F0 regions, respectively. Black rectangles denote regions along STG tuned predominantly to low F0s. HGs denoted by white lines. For reference, arrows and
rectangles are in the same anatomical locations on both maps. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 431

timbre conditions (Figs. 12, 13). Although a majority of the
voxels that exhibited tuning to more than one dimension were
selective to the pure-tone and timbre conditions, it may seem
surprising that the overall proportion was not greater, given the
evidence that tuning in both these conditions is driven by spec-
tral content. This lack of overlap in the populations may be due
in part to the fact that the range of pure-tone frequencies (100–

### 6400 Hz) was greater than the Fc range (400–6400 Hz), but may

also reflect genuine differences in selectivity based on higher-
level features, such as sound complexity or BW. Indeed, our
findings are in line with single- and multi-unit studies in other
species that have identified neurons that are sensitive to either
pure tones or complex sounds, but not both (Rauschecker et
al., 1995; Feng and Wang, 2017; Kikuchi et al., 2019).
100%
< 0%
Pure
Tones
Pure
Tones
Pure
Tones
Timbre
Timbre
Pitch
Pure
Tones
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
Timbre
Pitch
low
high
R2
Freq (Hz)
B
Pure Tones
100-6400 Hz
Pure Tones
100-6400 Hz
Timbre
400-6400 Hz
Pitch
100-1600 Hz
Timbre
400-6400 Hz
Pitch
100-1600 Hz
S03
S07
L
R
L
R
A
S03
S07
L
R
L
R
Stimulus CF (Hz)

Beta (% sig. change)

1.6k
6.4k
1.6k
6.4k
1.6k

1.6k
6.4k
1.6k
6.4k
1.6k

1.6k
6.4k
1.6k
6.4k
1.6k

Pure Tones
Timbre
Pitch
Pure Tones
Timbre
Pitch
Pure Tones
Timbre
Pitch
Data 1
Data 2
Mean model fit
Stimulus CF (Hz)

Beta (% sig. change)
Beta (% sig. change)
-4
-2

C
E
D
Stimulus CF (Hz)
Figure 16. The spectral tuning model is a poor model of pitch. A, Unthresholded CF maps for the spectral tuning model for two individual participants. Maps are shown on spherical cortical
surfaces of the left and right hemispheres, respectively. Each row is the CF map for a given condition (pure tones, timbre, and pitch, respectively). Custom color maps span the respective CF
range of each condition, as labeled. L = left hemisphere, R = right hemisphere. HGs denoted by white lines. B, Cross-validated R2 heat maps for the spectral tuning model for the same two
participants as in A. C, A voxel for a single participant showing good tuning for pure tones and timbre but poor tuning for pitch. The black line is the average spectral tuning model fit. The col-
ored lines are the b values for each stimulus type, ordered from low to high. D, A voxel for a single participant showing good tuning for pure tones and pitch, but poor tuning for timbre. Same plotting conventions as in C. E, A voxel for a single participant showing good tuning for all three conditions. Same plotting conventions as in C, D. Note that the spectral tuning model is
unable to account for pitch tuning in D and E.
432 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch

Our data suggest the existence of two
distinct cortical representations: one based
on frequency selectivity (i.e., tonotopy),
and the other based on pitch or F0 selectiv-
ity. While partially overlapping, responses
in HG were predominantly driven by spec-
tral content, as reflected by the strong
model fits in both the pure-tone and tim-
bre conditions. Pitch representations, on
the other hand, were mostly found in
regions surrounding HG. These findings
are consistent with the idea that lower-
level frequency content is processed pre-
dominantly in primary auditory region A1
and higher-level sound features (such as
pitch) are processed predominantly in sur-
rounding nonprimary (belt and parabelt)
regions. Pitch tuning in auditory cortex
While many studies have explored responses to pitch in auditory
cortex, the approach has generally been to compare sounds with
salient pitches to those with weak pitches or to present a variety
of pitch-evoking stimuli to identify pitch-sensitive regions
(Penagos et al., 2004; Hall and Plack, 2009; Norman-Haignere et
al., 2013). In contrast, the present study explored voxel-wise tun-
ing to different pitches while controlling for spectral variations. We were able to identify voxels in all participants that exhibited
selectivity along the F0 dimension. The initial maps incorporat-
ing all voxels exhibiting F0 selectivity suggested a (somewhat
noisy) high-low-high organization of F0. However, when only
voxels exclusively selective along the F0 dimension (R2, 30% in
the other two dimensions) were selected (Fig. 15), regions dis-
tinctly tuned to low, medium, and high F0s were found bilater-
ally, with clear clusters of voxels tuned to low F0s around the
medial portion of HG (black arrows) and lining STG (black rec-
tangles), and clear clusters of voxels tuned to high F0s in regions
anterolateral to HG (white arrows). This distributed pitch coding
throughout auditory regions is consistent with findings from cort-
ical surface electrode recordings in humans (Gander et al., 2019). Bilaterality in cortical representations
There is some disagreement in the literature regarding the later-
ality of cortical pitch representations. Bilateral sensitivity to pitch
has been found in a number of studies (Patterson et al., 2002; Penagos et al., 2004; Warren et al., 2005; Hall and Plack, 2009; Norman-Haignere et al., 2013; Allen et al., 2017, 2018; De
Angelis et al., 2018), whereas some others have suggested a right
hemisphere lateralization for some forms of pitch processing
(Zatorre et al., 2002; Hyde et al., 2008; Albouy et al., 2020). No
significant difference in the number of pitch-tuned voxels
between hemispheres was found in the present study, suggesting
that pitch selectivity is represented bilaterally. Limitations
Our results are consistent with pitch selectivity across extended
regions of auditory cortex. However, as noted above, F0 is inver-
sely proportional to spectral density of the harmonics. Although
our additional analyses supported the hypothesis that the
responses reflected selectivity to F0 and not spectral density, the
use of both harmonic and inharmonic tones could help to better
dissociate F0 and pitch from spectral density. Our design involved varying either the F0 or Fc of a complex
tone, while keeping the other dimension fixed. A fully-crossed
stimulus design (i.e., pairing all possible F0s with all possible val-
ues of Fc) would have required more scanning sessions, but
would help determine the generalizability of the F0 and Fc repre-
sentations, such as whether the tuning to F0 of a given voxel is
independent of the stimulus Fc. Now that the existence of F0
tuning has been established, such additional questions could be
addressed in a more extensive study. Finally, an open question is how relative changes are repre-
sented in cortex (i.e., contour and interval size, regardless of
absolute changes in frequency or F0). Relative pitch processing is
essential for both music and speech comprehension, but little is
known about its cortical representations. There is some fMRI
evidence of lateralization differences for the processing of relative
contour changes versus absolute interval sizes (Stewart et al.,
2008), and recent studies, based on recordings from subdurally
implanted electrodes, as participants listened to variable pitch
contours in speech stimuli, provide evidence of both absolute
and relative pitch encoding in human auditory cortex (Tang et
al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2021). While the present study suggests
there may be systematic maps of absolute pitch, follow-up work
is needed to explore the contributions of relative pitch in the
cortical processing hierarchy and to assess whether there is any
systematic representation based on the magnitude and/or direc-
tion of change. Since relative changes are based on the relation-
ships between consecutive sounds, this would point toward a
higher, more holistic level of processing in the hierarchy com-
pared with absolute pitch representations. References
Albouy P, Benjamin L, Morillon B, Zatorre RJ (2020) Distinct sensitivity to
spectrotemporal modulation supports brain asymmetry for speech and
melody. Science 367:1043–1047. Allen EJ, Oxenham AJ (2014) Symmetric interactions and interference
between pitch and timbre. J Acoust Soc Am 135:1371–1379. Allen EJ, Burton PC, Olman CA, Oxenham AJ (2017) Representations of pitch
and timbre variation in human auditory cortex. J Neurosci 37:1284–1293. Allen EJ, Moerel M, Lage-Castellanos A, De Martino F, Formisano E, Oxenham AJ (2018) Encoding of natural timbre dimensions in human
auditory cortex. Neuroimage 166:60–70. Assmann PF, Nearey TM (2008) Identification of frequency-shifted vowels. J
Acoust Soc Am 124:3203–3212. Bendor D (2012) Does a pitch center exist in auditory cortex? J Neurophysiol
107:743–746. Figure 17. Spectral density does not explain F0 effects. A, Scatterplots showing the mean pure tone b minus the mean
timbre b for each “pitch voxel” for each participant, defined as voxels that exceed the feature tuning model R2 threshold of
30% for the pitch condition. Each participant’s data are a different color. Fit lines for each participant’s data, as well as mean
fit line (black) are plotted. Pearson’s r and slope of the line fit are reported. B, Scatterplots showing the mean highest pitch
b (F0 = 1600Hz) minus the mean lowest pitch b (F0 = 100 Hz) for each “pitch voxel” for each participant. Half of the
data were used for fitting and measured responses are from independent data. Same plotting conventions as A. Allen etal. · Distinct RepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
J. Neurosci., January19, 2022 • 42(3):416–434 • 433

Bendor D, Wang X (2005) The neuronal representation of pitch in primate
auditory cortex. Nature 436:1161–1165. Bendor D, Wang X (2006) Cortical representations of pitch in monkeys and
humans. Curr Opin Neurobiol 16:391–399. Bourk TR, Mielcarz JP, Norris BE (1981) Tonotopic organization of the an-
teroventral cochlear nucleus of the cat. Hear Res 4:215–241. Cooper NP (1999) Vibration of beads placed on the basilar membrane in the
basal turn of the cochlea. J Acoust Soc Am 106: L59–L64. Da Costa S, van der Zwaag W, Marques JP, Frackowiak RSJ, Clarke S, Saenz
M (2011) Human primary auditory cortex follows the shape of Heschl’s
gyrus. J Neurosci 31:14067–14075. De Angelis V, De Martino F, Moerel M, Santoro R, Hausfeld L, Formisano E
(2018) Cortical processing of pitch: model-based encoding and decoding
of auditory fMRI responses to real-life sounds. Neuroimage 180:291–210.
de Heer WA, Huth AG, Griffiths TL, Gallant JL, Theunissen FE (2017) The
hierarchical cortical organization of human speech processing. J Neurosci
37:6539–6557. Dumoulin SO, Wandell BA (2008) Population receptive field estimates in
human visual cortex. Neuroimage 39:647–660. Feng L, Wang X (2017) Harmonic template neurons in primate auditory cor-
tex underlying complex sound processing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114: E840–E848. Fischl B (2012) FreeSurfer. Neuroimage 62:774–781. Formisano E, Kim DS, Di Salle F, van de Moortele PF, Ugurbil K, Goebel R
(2003) Mirror-symmetric tonotopic maps in human primary auditory
cortex. Neuron 40:859–869. Gander PE, Kumar S, Sedley W, Nourski KV, Oya H, Kovach CK, Kawasaki
H, Kikuchi Y, Patterson RD, Howard MA, Griffiths TD (2019) Direct
electrophysiological mapping of human pitch-related processing in audi-
tory cortex. Neuroimage 202:116076. Glasser MF, Van Essen DC (2011) Mapping human cortical areas in vivo
based on myelin content as revealed by T1- and T2-weighted MRI. J
Neurosci 31:11597–11616. Hall DA, Plack CJ (2009) Pitch processing sites in the human auditory brain. Cereb Cortex 19:576–585. Hamilton LS, Oganian Y, Hall J, Chang EF (2021) Parallel and distributed
encoding of speech across human auditory cortex. Cell 184:4626–4639. Hillenbrand JM, Clark MJ (2009) The role of f 0 and formant frequencies in
distinguishing the voices of men and women. Atten Percept Psychophys
71:1150–1166. Hyde KL, Peretz I, Zatorre RJ (2008) Evidence for the role of the right audi-
tory cortex in fine pitch resolution. Neuropsychologia 46:632–639. International Organization for Standardization (2003) Acoustics - normal
equal-loudness contours (standard no. 226). Geneva: International
Organization for Standardization. Kay KN, Rokem A, Winawer J, Dougherty RF, Wandell BA (2013)
GLMdenoise: a fast, automated technique for denoising task-based fMRI
data. Front Neurosci 7:1–15. Kay K, Jamison KW, Vizioli L, Zhang R, Margalit E, Ugurbil K (2019) A criti-
cal assessment of data quality and venous effects in sub-millimeter fMRI. Neuroimage 189:847–869. Kell AJE, Yamins DLK, Shook EN, Norman-Haignere SV, McDermott JH
(2018) A task-optimized neural network replicates human auditory
behavior, predicts brain responses, and reveals a cortical processing hier-
archy. Neuron 98:630–644.e16. Kikuchi Y, Kumar S, Baumann S, Overath T, Gander PE, Sedley W, Patterson RD, Petkov CI, Griffiths TD (2019) The distribution and nature
of responses to broadband sounds associated with pitch in the macaque
auditory cortex. Cortex 120:340–352. Kleiner M, Brainard D, Pelli D, Ingling A, Murray R, Broussard C (2007)
What’s new in Psychtoolbox-3? Percept 36: ECVP Abstr Suppl. Krumhansl CL, Iverson P (1992) Perceptual interactions between musical
pitch and timbre. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 18:739–751. Langner G, Sams M, Heil P, Schulze H (1997) Frequency and periodicity are
represented in orthogonal maps in the human auditory cortex: evidence
from magnetoencephalography. J Comp Physiol A 181:665–676. Langers DRM, van Dijk P (2012) Mapping the tonotopic organization in
human auditory cortex with minimally salient acoustic stimulation. Cereb Cortex 22:2024–2038. Levitt H (1971) Transformed up-down methods in psychoacoustics. J Acoust
Soc Am 49:467–477. Marozeau J, de Cheveigné A, McAdams S, Winsberg S (2003) The dependency
of timbre on fundamental frequency. J Acoust Soc Am 114:2946–2957. McAdams S (2013) Musical timbre perception. In: The psychology of music. Amsterdam: Elsevier Inc. Moerel M, De Martino F, Formisano E (2012) Processing of natural sounds
in human auditory cortex: tonotopy, spectral tuning, and relation to voice
sensitivity. J Neurosci 32:14205–14216. Moerel M, De Martino F, Santoro R, Ugurbil K, Goebel R, Yacoub E, Formisano E (2013) Processing of natural sounds: characterization of multi-
peak spectral tuning in human auditory cortex. J Neurosci 33:11888–11898. Moerel M, De Martino F, Formisano E (2014) An anatomical and functional
topography of human auditory cortical areas. Front Neurosci 8:1–14. Moore BCJ, Glasberg BR, Shailer MJ (1984) Frequency and intensity difference
limens for harmonics within complex tones. J Acoust Soc Am 75:550–561. Narayan SS, Temchin AN, Recio A, Ruggero MA (1998) Frequency tuning of
basilar membrane and auditory nerve fibers in the same cochleae. Science
282:1882–1884. Norman-Haignere S, McDermott JH (2016) Distortion products in auditory
fMRI research: measurements and solutions. Neuroimage 129:401–413. Norman-Haignere S, Kanwisher N, McDermott JH (2013) Cortical pitch
regions in humans respond primarily to resolved harmonics and are
located in specific tonotopic regions of anterior auditory cortex. J
Neurosci 33:19451–19469. Norman-Haignere S, Kanwisher NG, McDermott JH (2015) Distinct cortical
pathways for music and speech revealed by hypothesis-free voxel decom-
position. Neuron 88:1281–1296. Nuttall AL, Dolan DF (1996) Steady-state sinusoidal velocity responses of the
basilar membrane in guinea pig. J Acoust Soc Am 99:1556–1565. Pantev C, Hoke M, Lütkenhöner B, Lehnertz K (1989) Tonotopic organiza-
tion of the auditory cortex: pitch versus frequency representation. Science
246:486–488. Patterson RD, Uppenkamp S, Johnsrude IS, Griffiths TD (2002) The process-
ing of temporal pitch and melody information in auditory cortex. Neuron 36:767–776. Penagos H, Melcher JR, Oxenham AJ (2004) A neural representation of pitch
salience in nonprimary human auditory cortex revealed with functional
magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci 24:6810–6815. Rademacher J, Morosan P, Schormann T, Schleicher A, Werner C, Freund
HJ, Zilles K (2001) Probabilistic mapping and volume measurement of
human primary auditory cortex. Neuroimage 13:669–683. Rauschecker JP, Tian B, Hauser M (1995) Processing of complex sounds in
the macaque nonprimary auditory cortex. Science 268:111–114. Ruggero MA, Rich NC, Recio A, Narayan SS, Robles L (1997) Basilar-mem-
brane responses to tones at the base of the chinchilla cochlea. J Acoust
Soc Am 101:2151–2163. Saenz M, Langers DRM (2014) Tonotopic mapping of human auditory cor-
tex. Hear Res 307:42–52. Schreiner CE, Langner G (1997) Laminar fine structure of frequency organi-
zation in auditory midbrain the main auditory midbrain. Nature 388:
383–386. Stewart L, Overath T, Warren JD, Foxton JM, Griffiths TD (2008) fMRI evidence
for a cortical hierarchy of pitch pattern processing. PLoS One 3:e1470. Striem-Amit E, Hertz U, Amedi A (2011) Extensive cochleotopic mapping of
human auditory cortical fields obtained with phase-encoding fMRI. PLoS
One 6:e17832. Talavage TM, Sereno MI, Melcher JR, Ledden PJ, Rosen BR, Dale AM (2004)
Tonotopic organization in human auditory cortex revealed by progres-
sions of frequency sensitivity. J Neurophysiol 91:1282–1296. Tang C, Hamilton LS, Chang EF (2017) Intonational speech prosody encod-
ing in the human auditory cortex. Science 357:797–801. Thomas JM, Huber E, Stecker GC, Boynton GM, Saenz M, Fine I (2015)
Population
receptive
field
estimates
of
human
auditory
cortex. Neuroimage 105:428–439. Von Békésy G (1960) Experiments in hearing. New York: Mcgraw Hill. Wallace MN, Johnston PW, Palmer AR (2002) Histochemical identification
of cortical areas in the auditory region of the human brain. Exp Brain Res
143:499–508. Warren JD, Jennings AR, Griffiths TD (2005) Analysis of the spectral enve-
lope of sounds by the human brain. Neuroimage 24:1052–1057. Zatorre RJ, Belin P, Penhune VB (2002) Structure and function of auditory
cortex: music and speech. Trends Cogn Sci 6:37–46.
434 • J. Neurosci., January 19,2022 • 42(3):416–434
Allen etal. · DistinctRepresentationsofTonotopy and Pitch
